                                                        Generative quantum advantage for classical and quantum problems

                                                                       Hsin-Yuan Huang,1, 2, * Michael Broughton,1 Norhan Eassa,1, 3
                                                                       Hartmut Neven,1 Ryan Babbush,1 and Jarrod R. McClean1, †
                                                                        1
                                                                        Google Quantum AI, 340 Main Street, Venice, CA 90291, USA
                                                             2
                                                              Department of Physics, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena 91125, CA, USA
                                                          3
                                                            Department of Physics and Astronomy, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47906, USA
                                                                                         (Dated: September 12, 2025)
                                                           Recent breakthroughs in generative machine learning, powered by massive computational re-
                                                        sources, have demonstrated unprecedented human-like capabilities. While beyond-classical quan-
                                                        tum experiments can generate samples from classically intractable distributions, their complexity
                                                        has thwarted all efforts toward efficient learning. This challenge has hindered demonstrations of
                                                        generative quantum advantage: the ability of quantum computers to learn and generate desired
                                                        outputs substantially better than classical computers. We resolve this challenge by introducing
arXiv:2509.09033v1 [quant-ph] 10 Sep 2025




                                                        families of generative quantum models that are hard to simulate classically, are efficiently trainable,
                                                        exhibit no barren plateaus or proliferating local minima, and can learn to generate distributions
                                                        beyond the reach of classical computers. Using a 68-qubit superconducting quantum processor, we
                                                        demonstrate these capabilities in two scenarios: learning classically intractable probability distribu-
                                                        tions and learning quantum circuits for accelerated physical simulation. Our results establish that
                                                        both learning and sampling can be performed efficiently in the beyond-classical regime, opening new
                                                        possibilities for quantum-enhanced generative models with provable advantage.




                                                                                                 I.   Introduction

                                               Fueled by the overwhelming growth of computational power, recent progress in machine learning has continued
                                            to redefine the boundaries of what was once deemed impossible. Much of this progress has focused on large
                                            language models (LLMs) (1 ) and diffusion models (2 ), which represent specific types of generative machine learning
                                            models (3 ). The promise of quantum computers to dramatically expand our computational capabilities for certain
                                            problems has naturally led to speculation about how quantum technology will reshape the landscape of machine
                                            learning. Here, we establish a new type of advantage for generative tasks supported by both theory and experiment,
                                            with strong implications for both classical and quantum models.
                                               Perhaps due to its potential impact, quantum machine learning (4 ) is a field characterized by equal amounts of
                                            optimism, skepticism, and ambiguity. It encompasses both how quantum technology may impact machine learning
                                            and how machine learning may impact quantum computing. When data arrives as quantum states, exponential
                                            advantages have been both proven mathematically and demonstrated experimentally (5 –7 ). However, when data
                                            arrives as classical information to be processed by quantum computers, the story becomes much more subtle (8 –12 ).
                                               Modern machine learning is driven by empirical successes on large datasets with immense computing power.
                                            However, the current state of quantum computers more closely resembles the early development of neural networks:
                                            absent the requisite computational power to test ideas empirically, we must resort to proofs in simplified computa-
                                            tional frameworks. Using learning theory, there are approaches with provable exponential advantages on classical
                                            data (13 –19 ), but these often rely on embedding somewhat artificial problems, such as discrete logarithm, into
                                            learning problems or assume models of fast access like QRAM that remain controversial in their practicality (12 ).
                                            Moreover, these same frameworks quickly conclude the absence of advantages when faced with general distribu-
                                            tions (20 –23 ), echoing early pessimistic and distribution-specific hardness results (24 –27 ) in theoretical classical
                                            machine learning. This leaves a considerable gap in our understanding of quantum advantages for empirical and
                                            less structured distributions, which this work helps resolve.
                                               Generative quantum advantage represents opportunities for quantum computers to expand what is possible in
                                            tasks where the goal is to generate new samples from a target probability distribution. Key first steps along this path
                                            have been the experimental demonstrations of beyond-classical circuit sampling (28 –31 ), which provide evidence for
                                            the existence of models where quantum computers exhibit significant advantages in inference. However, the same
                                            structural properties of these distributions that support their difficulty in classical inference led many to believe that
                                            efficiently learning these models from data would not be possible, severing the link required to view these as learning
                                            models rather than simple circuits. Without the ability to both efficiently train and sample (conduct inference) from



                                            * Corresponding author: hsinyuan@caltech.edu
                                            † Corresponding author: jmcclean@google.com
                                                                                                                              2


(a)                                       (b) Standard Landscape                        (c)
                                                                                         1010011000111001
                                                                          5x Z
                                                                               oom
                                                                                   In    1000101000011101
                                                                                                          Input:
                                                                                         1110011010100001
  Generative                                                                                 Training  0010010100
  Classical AI    — VS —                                                                 0101001001101000
                                                                                             Dataset
                                                  Our Landscape                          1110001001000111
                                                                                                      Output:
                                                                                         1001010010100000
                                                                                                    1101001110
                                                                                         1001001000100001
 Generative
                                                                                              Learning to generate
 Quantum AI                                                                                    classical bitstrings

(d)




                                                                                               Generate
                                    Very deep circuit                                                     Low-depth circuit

Figure 1: Generative quantum advantage overview. (a) Generative AI enabled by quantum technology allows learning
and sampling from distributions that are classically hard to sample from. (b) Standard approaches to learning generative
quantum AI models suffer from poor training landscapes due to issues such as proliferation of suboptimal local minima
and barren plateaus, in contrast to the techniques proposed here that enable favorable landscapes with efficient training
even in classically hard regimes. (c) As a key application, we theoretically and experimentally demonstrate advantage in
sampling from classical distributions that are classically intractable, scaling up to 816 shallow qubits with inferred results
beyond 34,000 shallow qubits. This is enabled by an exact deep-to-shallow circuit mapping that allows exact sampling from
very deep 2D circuits, which we prove are universal. (d) We prove that learning to generate compressed quantum circuits
for physical simulation is classically hard. This stands in sharp contrast to the efficient techniques for learning to generate
low-depth circuits demonstrated here experimentally on a real device using up to 40 physical qubits.


these distributions, one cannot claim a generative quantum advantage for these tasks. Many works have aimed to
frame and establish generative quantum advantage (32 –41 ). However, to date, these methods either embed Shor’s
algorithm into a learning context inaccessible to experimental demonstration, or fail to establish provably efficient
training due to well-known issues such as barren plateaus (42 , 43 ) or the proliferation of local minima (44 ). In
contrast, we experimentally demonstrate provably efficient learning and sampling from distributions accessible to
near-term devices while quantifying precise beyond-classical resource crossovers not present in existing theoretical
works. We achieve this through an exact mapping we develop between families of deep circuits and shallow circuits
in conjunction with experimental results.
   In this work, we close the loop initiated by beyond-classical demonstrations to achieve full generative quantum
advantage by showing experimentally and theoretically that there exist distributions that may be both learned
and sampled efficiently through quantum models, for which sampling is provably beyond the reach of classical
computers. This advantage builds upon recent progress in efficiently learning shallow quantum circuits (45 –48 )
and the established difficulty in sampling from them (28 , 49 –51 ). Remarkably, the training of these quantum
models is classically efficient, but inference requires a quantum computer. The generative quantum advantage is
enabled by a quantum model equipped with efficient classical training but no efficient classical inference.
   The work is structured as follows. We first define and explain the concept of generative quantum advantage,
establishing a theoretical foundation with several key results about the power of shallow quantum circuits and
the necessity of quantum computers for efficient model compression. We then review the sewing technique (45 )
and demonstrate that, in conjunction with a local cost function, it provably simplifies model parameter landscapes
by eliminating both barren plateaus (42 , 43 ) and local minima (44 ) in shallow circuits. To substantiate these

                                                                                                               没理解存在distribution的意
                                                                                                               义
                                                                                                                    3

theoretical insights, we explicitly define a problem where we achieve generative quantum advantage on a classical
distribution that is both easy-to-train and hard-to-sample from without a quantum computer. We support this
with experimental demonstrations that map to an effective 816 shallow qubits, qubits in the shallow representation
of the quantum model that we sample using deep quantum circuits with 68 physical qubits, and an analytical
mapping that leverages existing beyond-classical results (30 ) to train and emulate in the beyond-classical regime
up to an effective 34,304 shallow qubits. This provides an upper bound on the required quantum resources, as more
optimal mappings may be discovered in the future. We then present an experimental demonstration of generative
quantum advantage in quantum circuit compression, providing insights into how the sewing technique transforms
the learning landscape. An overview of our results and major objectives is presented in Fig. 1. We conclude with
a discussion of potential applications and future directions for generative quantum advantage.


                                       II.   Generative quantum advantage

   Quantum advantage manifests in various forms (52 ). Traditional approaches have focused on computational
speedups for specific problems, such as integer factoring or quantum simulation. However, as both quantum
technologies and artificial intelligence advance, a new frontier of quantum advantage is emerging. We study an
emerging paradigm termed generative quantum advantage, which we anticipate will become increasingly significant
as quantum technologies and generative machine learning continue to advance. This form of advantage focuses on
the ability to learn and generate complex patterns.
Definition 1 (Generative problem). A generative problem involves learning to produce outputs that match spe-
cific patterns. The learner must develop the ability to generate new outputs that follow these patterns from
samples. The patterns may represent mappings from inputs to outputs, underlying distributions, transformations
between representations, or circuits that achieve desired behaviors. The patterns can be defined explicitly through
specifications or implicitly through examples.
   We emphasize that both learning and inference are essential in our definition of a generative problem. Previous
experimental demonstrations have established strong evidence of quantum advantage in generating classically hard
probability distributions (29 –31 ), but useful generative advantage requires efficient learning from data as well.
Having established what constitutes a generative problem, we now characterize when quantum computers offer an
advantage in solving such problems. The characterization of generative quantum advantage encompasses both the
quality and efficiency of the generation process.
Definition 2 (Generative quantum advantage). A generative problem exhibits quantum advantage when a quan-
tum computer can learn to generate the desired outputs substantially better than any classical computer. Here,
better means achieving reduced sample complexity, higher accuracy, faster learning or generation time, or the capa-
bility to generate outputs that are practically infeasible for classical computers. The outputs may include classical
data, quantum states, circuits, algorithms, or other well-defined objects.
   To illustrate these concepts concretely, we present three fundamental tasks that exemplify the potential for
generative quantum advantage. The first involves generating classical bitstrings according to complex probability
distributions, the second focuses on generating improved simulation circuits by learning hidden structures, and the
third addresses the generation of quantum states under unitary transformations.


                                    Example task 1: Learning to generate bitstrings

Definition 3 (Learning to generate bitstrings). Consider an unknown conditional distribution 𝑝(𝑦|𝑥) mapping
𝑛-bit input strings 𝑥 to 𝑚-bit output strings 𝑦. The goal is to learn a generative model that, given any input string
𝑥 ∈ {0, 1}𝑛 , can produce output strings 𝑦 ∈ {0, 1}𝑚 sampled from 𝑝(𝑦|𝑥). The quality of the generative model is
determined by how well its output distribution approximates 𝑝(𝑦|𝑥) across different 𝑥’s.
  This task is facilitated by our model of Generative QNNs, which elevates QNNs to a generative setting through
a particular encoding of the input and output processes. We prove these models are universal for all classical
conditional probabilities 𝑝(𝑦|𝑥). The technical definition of Generative QNN is given in Appendix H as Definition 14
and the proof of their universality as Proposition 3.
Theorem 1 (Informal: Classically hard, quantumly easy generative models). Under standard complexity-theoretic
conjectures, there exist distributions 𝑝(𝑦|𝑥) mapping classical 𝑛-bit strings to 𝑚-bit strings that a quantum computer
can efficiently learn to generate using classical data samples, but are hard to generate with classical computers.
  We prove this theorem for two families of models we leverage later in this work: tomographically-complete
shallow QNNs and instantaneously deep QNNs (IDQNNs), presented in Appendix H as Theorems 12 and 13.
We demonstrate that these quantum models can be learned from a modest number of classical data samples.
                                                                                                                     4

Furthermore, an efficient classical learning algorithm suffices to learn these quantum models. However, performing
inference and generation from these quantum models is computationally inefficient for classical machines. In
particular, the quantum models are designed such that the more 0’s there are in the input bitstring 𝑥, the harder
it becomes to classically sample from 𝑝(𝑦|𝑥), with 𝑥 = 0𝑛 being the classically hardest case. The training dataset
provided to both the classical and quantum generative ML models contains many output bitstrings from 𝑥 = 0𝑛 ,
along with many output bitstrings with varying fractions of 0 in 𝑥. The details are given in Appendix C.2.a.
   Our experimental demonstrations for classical bitstring sampling leverage the properties of a special class of
shallow generative QNNs along with a shallow-to-deep exact mapping sketched in Fig. 2(b) to optimize experimental
resources. This family of shallow quantum generative models permits very efficient classical training, yet are
remarkably powerful. They can generate distributions with highly non-local correlations that are classically hard
to sample from. With a sufficient number of qubits, generating an output bitstring from the shallow quantum
model is equivalent to sampling a deep quantum model and generating a bitstring from the deep quantum model.
For this reason, in addition to their constant-time execution, we term them instantaneously deep quantum neural
networks (IDQNNs) and define them formally in Definition 16 of Appendix H.2. IDQNNs yield the following:
Proposition 1 (Informal: IDQNN samples and generates from deep quantum circuits). For any deep quantum
circuit 𝐶, there exists an IDQNN that samples a deep circuit 𝐷 from a family containing 𝐶 and generates a bitstring
from the deep circuit 𝐷 in constant time with at most polynomial overhead in the size of the circuit 𝐶.
   This property is stated formally and proven in Appendix H.2. This remarkable fact relies on principles used
in measurement-based quantum computing (MBQC) (53 ) and insights regarding the power of shallow quantum
circuits (50 , 54 –58 ). In contrast to some previous works, these shallow quantum circuits not only exhibit a
separation against restricted classical computational models, but are intractable for any polynomial-time classical
algorithms. Assuming that the non-uniform polynomial hierarchy does not collapse, sampling a deep quantum
circuit 𝐷 and generating a bitstring from 𝐷 is classically hard, as articulated by Conjecture 1 and proven in
Proposition 4 in Appendix H.3. Hence, from Proposition 1, accurately sampling from the output of a wide shallow
circuit is also classically hard. Unlike shallow classical analogs, these circuits can use their quantum resources
to probabilistically sample into the future from circuits that would otherwise require very long execution times.
Probabilistic sampling is key here, as generating from a particular deep quantum circuit would require feedforward
as well as non-constant depth similar to standard MBQC (53 ).
   While the family of shallow circuits we use is quite powerful, there are other problems where a different type of
shallow quantum model can be motivated. In the more general setting, we require an ancilla system to implement
inference on the learned quantum generative model, also known as the sewing technique in Ref. (45 ) and depicted
in Fig. 3. Broadly speaking, the sewing technique is a simple method for using ancilla qubits to provably stitch
together the action of local unitaries into the unique global unitary transformation for the entire system, even when
the local unitaries do not commute and contain additional degrees of freedom. This enables an efficient form of
divide-and-conquer learning for shallow circuits. To illustrate the more general learning scenario, we consider a
second task: the ability to learn a constant-depth representation of any quantum circuit assuming it has one.


                          Example task 2: Learning to generate compressed simulation circuits

Definition 4 (Learning to generate compressed simulation circuits). Given an input circuit 𝐶 that simulates a
physical evolution, the goal of the generative model is to produce an alternative circuit 𝐶 ′ that implements a similar
transformation while requiring significantly less execution time, as quantified by circuit depth. The quality of the
generative model is determined by the extent to which it reduces circuit depth while maintaining high fidelity
between the transformations implemented by 𝐶 and 𝐶 ′ .
   At first glance, one might suspect that the promise of the existence of a constant-depth representation for a
circuit could enable a classical compiler of quantum circuits to efficiently discover that representation. Indeed, this
would be a natural goal for any quantum circuit compiler. However, we prove here that no such efficient classical
compiler can exist in the general case, and we reveal that identifying a constant-depth representation efficiently
requires a quantum computer, even when one is promised that such a representation exists.
Theorem 2 (Informal: Learning to generate compressed simulation circuit is classically hard). Given a general
polynomial-sized input circuit 𝐶 that is promised to have a constant-depth representation 𝐶 ′ , finding such a
constant-depth circuit representation is not classically efficient unless BPP = BQP.
   The precise statement is given as Theorem 14 in Appendix I, along with the accompanying proof. While some
circuits may still be amenable to efficient compression via classical compilers or other methods, this result proves
that in the general case, the circuit learning and sewing techniques presented here are not efficient without a quan-
tum computer. This theorem also has important implications for questions related to quantum circuit hiding and
compilation, which have been of significant interest in the context of verifiable quantum advantage (59 ). In particu-
                                                                                                                                                               5

                                                                                                                                               measure
                                                                                                        Time flows upward                      to get
                                                                                                                                               y[T,n]

      (a)       Device Layout
                                                       (b) Time flows out of plane                                                             operation
                                                                                                                                               generates
                                                           RZ     RZ   RZ   RZ       y[T,n]                                                    y[T-1,n]
                                                                                     x[T,n]                                                    x[T,n]
                                                          CZ    CZ                                                                             specify oper.

                                              Qubit          CZ
                                                          CZ CZ
                                              1st CZ
                                                                                                                                               operation
                                              2nd CZ                                                                                           generates
                                                          CZ    CZ
                                              3rd CZ                                                                                           y[1,n]
                                              4th CZ            CZ                   measure                                                   x[2,n]
                                                          CZ     CZ                  to get
                                                                                                                                               specify oper.
                                                                                     y[1,n]                 CZ           CZ           CZ

                                                                                     x[1,n]                                                    x[1,n]
                                                                                     specify gate                                              specify gate
                                                                                                    0   0        0   0        0   0        0
                                                                 2D Shallow QNN                         1D Deep QNN
      (c)                               (d)                                            (e)




Figure 2: Training and inference on classically-hard-to-sample distributions. (a) A round of CZ gates on the device
layout used for this experiment. There are 68 physical qubits on the grid, which correspond to up to 816 shallow qubits in
the 3D shallow representation. (b) Schematic correspondence from a 2D shallow circuit to a 1D deep circuit, illustrating
the mapping used experimentally between 3D shallow circuits and 2D deep circuits; see Appendix C.3.a for details. (c) The
number of classical samples required to reach a given gate fidelity in a generative QNN with classically easy training and
beyond-classical inference. The training dataset contains output bitstrings from 𝑥 = 000 . . . 0 as well as output bitstrings for
random inputs 𝑥 with varying fractions of 0’s. (d) Performance of quantum and classical models on hardware and simulation
as quantified by XEB score. Inference is performed on 𝑥 = 000 . . . 0 to remove experimental requirements for feed-forward
and maximize quantum-classical separation. (e) Performance inferred in the beyond-classical regime using our mapping
and data from Ref. (30 ) with 67 physical qubits, evaluated on 𝑥 = 000 . . . 0. Even with hardware noise, quantum models
outperform current classical models by a significant margin.


lar, there can exist polynomial-depth representations of constant-depth circuits that no efficient classical adversary
can reduce to their constant-depth representation, even with the explicit promise that such a representation exists.


                                    Example task 3: Learning to generate quantum states

  In the previous task, we assumed access to some representation of the quantum model to be learned, though
perhaps not the most efficient representation. In the general family of generative learning, we may also consider
cases where we can provide input states to a particular process and perform local measurements on the resulting
states. We define this type of task as learning to generate quantum states.
Definition 5 (Learning to generate quantum states). Consider an unknown unitary transformation 𝑈 acting on
𝑛-qubit systems. The goal is to learn a quantum generative model that, given any input quantum state |𝜓⟩, can
produce an output quantum state close to 𝑈 |𝜓⟩. The quality of the quantum generative model is determined by
how well its output state approximates 𝑈 |𝜓⟩ across different input states |𝜓⟩.
                                                                                                                    6

  Until recently, whether this task was efficient for a quantum computer remained an open question even for any
target unitary that has a shallow structure. As we show in the following theorem, this task is efficiently solvable
on a quantum computer.
Theorem 3 (Informal: Shallow quantum maps are efficient to learn with local measurements). Given the ability
to sample from an unknown shallow unitary 𝑈 using only local measurements, it is efficient to learn a circuit
representation for implementing 𝑈 using a quantum computer.
  Precise scaling and definitions for this theorem are provided in Appendix F as well as in Ref. (45 ). We support
this theorem here for the first time with an experimental demonstration, along with additional theorems that
provide concrete applications and illuminate the underlying mechanisms responsible for this efficiency.


                                           Improved optimization landscape

   At the core of the ability to efficiently learn in all the given example tasks thus far is the capacity to improve
the learning landscape through a divide-and-conquer methodology. If one attempts to learn the entire generative
process across all qubits simultaneously, the landscape becomes riddled with suboptimal local minima. This occurs
even when the target process is essentially entirely classical and the learning model is customized to be well-aligned
with the target model. This challenge is highlighted by the following theorem:
Theorem 4 (Informal: Local swap circuits have exponentially many suboptimal local minima). Consider the task
of learning to generate quantum states for a circuit that performs SWAPs on a 1D line between qubits 𝑖 and 𝑖 + 3
with some probability, using a learning model parameterized by nearest-neighbor SWAPs on that same line. This
learning landscape contains exponentially many suboptimal local minima with large basins of attraction.
   A detailed statement is given in Appendix G.1.c as Theorem 9, along with the accompanying proof. This means
that even though such a problem is essentially classical, free of barren plateaus (42 ), and employs a model with an
inductive bias strongly aligned with the target, any treatment of these problems by standard optimization methods
will require exponentially many restarts as a function of system size to succeed with high probability.
   In contrast, our divide-and-conquer learning algorithm decomposes the generative QNN over 𝑛 qubits into over-
lapping circuit pieces acting on local qubit regions, as illustrated in Fig. 3(b). For shallow generative QNNs, each
piece of the circuit acts on a constant number of qubits and can be learned individually by training each piece to
locally invert the transformation of the target unitary. After learning each piece independently, they are coherently
combined using the sewing technique with ancilla qubits to reconstruct a global 𝑛-qubit unitary representing the
trained generative QNN. When learning these circuit pieces over local regions of qubits, the number of suboptimal
basins of attraction becomes constant, and hence so does the success probability for random restarts in standard
optimization strategies. This is formalized in the following theorem:
Theorem 5 (Informal: Landscapes associated with divide-and-conquer learning are benign). Given any constant-
depth unitary 𝑈 , our divide-and-conquer learning algorithms produce optimization landscapes that are either
strongly convex or have a constant number of local minima regions with respect to system size.
   A detailed proof and statements of this theorem are found in Appendix G.2 as Theorems 10 and 11. This theorem
implies that any strategy based on learning these overlapping pieces of circuits with random restarts and simple
gradient descent will be efficient in learning the target unitary and, by extension, the quantum generative model.
Hence, one way of understanding how these techniques achieve efficient learning is by observing how they render
the landscapes benign by avoiding both barren plateaus and proliferation of local minima.
   We support this numerically in a later experiment depicted in Fig. 4, where one can visually observe the dramatic
improvement in the landscapes as well as success probabilities for random restarts. Indeed, even for a modest
number of qubits, the overwhelming advantages of our learning techniques become apparent.


                                            III.   Experimental results

   To close the loop on generative quantum advantage, it is essential to demonstrate efficient training and inference
in a regime where sampling is classically hard. While our theoretical results establish exact mappings and conditions
under which this can be achieved in an asymptotic sense, questions remain about specific applications as well as
resource thresholds for advantage with real devices and the particular generative models we introduce. Here we
describe and perform experiments on superconducting quantum processors using the models we have introduced
to ground these theoretical insights and demonstrate evidence for generative quantum advantage.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  7


 (a)                                                         (b)           1. Decompose QNN into Pieces                                                3. Combine the Pieces to form Trained QNN
            18   20   20
                                            System Qubit
                                                                                                                                                                      Swap with Ancilla qubits
            18   19
                                            Ancilla Qubit

       17   17   19   12   11   10          Unused Qubit
                                                                    U1             U2             U3            U4            U5                             U1                  U3                    U5
       16   16        12   11   10                                                                                                                     Swap w/ Anc.          Swap w/ Anc.          Swap w/ Anc.

                                                                              2. Train / Learn Each Pieces
                                                                                                                                                               +                   +                     +
            15   14   13   9    9    8      8                Locally Invert Locally Invert Locally Invert   Locally Invert Locally Invert
                                                                                                                                                             U1                  U3                    U5
            15   14   13   6    6    7      7




                                                                                                                                            Arbitrary deep
                      4    4    5    5                                                                                                                                U2                    U4
                                                                        Target U                               Target U
                 2    2    3    3        System-System CZ                                                                                                         Swap w/ Anc.          Swap w/ Anc.

                                         System-Ancilla CZ                                                                                                              +                     +
                                                                                                                                                                      U2                    U4
                      1    1

                                         Unused Coupler            +              +              +                +               +
                                                                 U1             U3             U5               U2              U4

 (c)        Qubit 3
                                                                                                 (d)               Qubit 16




Figure 3: Learning quantum generative models. (a) The layout of system and ancilla qubits embedded into the
superconducting qubit device used for learning with the sewing technique. Arrows indicate the qubits whose results are
plotted in panels (c) and (d). (b.1) Decomposition of the QNN into circuit pieces, each containing a block of 4 output
qubits. (b.2) Each circuit piece is trained to locally invert the target unitary of arbitrary depth. (b.3) The circuit pieces
are combined using the sewing technique, demonstrating how learning in blocks of 4 enables parallelization requiring only
2 rounds of application. (c) Experimental results from the trained generative QNN showing the expected value of 𝑍𝑖 for
qubit 3, comparing raw data and error-mitigated results against the ideal theoretical prediction. High-quality learning and
inference are demonstrated for both short times (left) and very long times (right). (d) The same comparison for qubit 16.


                                                       Experiments on learning to generate bitstrings

   Focusing first on the task of learning and generating samples from classically challenging distributions, we describe
the experimental realization of an IDQNN in (2+1)D, utilizing a Google 2D superconducting chip architecture (29 ).
Additional device and performance details are provided in Appendix B. In the learning procedure, we generate
data from an ideal set of pre-chosen parameters 𝛽 and learn these parameters to a precision of 10−3 through the
procedure described in Appendix H.4.b. We supply the same datasets to classical sequence-to-sequence learning
models, namely transformers and XGBoost decision trees, for comparison. The time dimension is fixed to a depth
of 𝑑 = 12 and we vary the physical qubits up to 68, corresponding to an effective shallow dimension of 816 qubits.
We also consider a class of related models where 𝛽 is rounded to produce the nearest Clifford circuit, allowing for
straightforward prediction of performance beyond sizes that are easily classically simulatable.
   The results, as quantified by cross-entropy benchmarking (XEB; see also Appendix A.4), measure the fidelity to
the ideal distribution and are plotted in Fig. 2. More details on the specific experiments plotted in Fig. 2 are provided
in Appendix C.3. The results for quantum models show that, although classical models can learn and generate the
distribution for small sizes, as size increases the quantum models demonstrate a considerable performance advantage
over the classical models, both of which use classical learning algorithms here. The classical models we tested aim
to learn the generative model 𝑝(𝑦|𝑥) directly, which has previously been shown to be hard (60 ). In contrast, we
train the parameters of the quantum models using classical computers, but generating new samples from the trained
quantum models requires a quantum computer and remains classically hard. The Clifford circuit proxies track the
performance of quantum models under real noise quite well and predict a sizable quantum performance advantage
even with experimental noise at larger sizes.
   However, while the IDQNN model can sample from classically hard distributions in the large size limit, it is
designed to facilitate efficient learning with its structure and is not optimized to produce hard samples at very low
                                                                                                                            8


                   (a)                                         (b)




                                                                          Standard
                                                                                           5x Zoom In
                                                                         Landscape




                                                                               Our
                                                                                          4x Zoom Out
                                                                         Landscape



Figure 4: Efficient learning from improved optimization landscapes. (a) The probability of success for learning the
SWAP-4 circuit using randomly restarted gradient descent with a local ansatz as a function of the number of qubits. Our
divide-and-conquer-based learning algorithm based on learning local circuit pieces avoids the exponential decay in success
probability observed with standard approaches. (b) Visualization of optimization landscapes for learning the SWAP-4
circuits with a local ansatz plotted in 2D. The divide-and-conquer nature of the sewing technique dramatically improves the
learning landscape from a flat and chaotic terrain filled with local minima (top) to one with large basins of attraction where
local minima are also global minima with zero loss function (bottom).


qubit counts. Hence, 816 shallow qubits are not yet expected to be in the beyond-classical regime. A more efficient
quantum circuit simulator able to handle additional structure, such as a tensor network-based approach, may still
be able to sample from these distributions at some sizes, constituting a quantum-inspired classical model for this
dataset. This raises the question of where the crossover for beyond-classical sampling occurs for these models and
whether we can demonstrate efficient learning in that regime as well.
   To address this question directly, we use the fact that IDQNNs can sample and generate from deep random
quantum circuits as shown in Corollary 2 and the precise circuits and performance results from recent beyond-
classical experimental demonstrations in Ref. (30 ). Using our exact mapping, we decompose the beyond-classical
circuits from Ref. (30 ) into an IDQNN form, such that learning and evaluation of any particular instance can be
mapped between the two. Here, we are able to evaluate the overhead in the shallow representation of IDQNNs
as well as the power of the RCS circuits, finding that an IDQNN representation of the beyond-classical limit is
estimated to require 34,304 shallow qubits, mapped to deep circuits on 67 physical qubits.
   In this representation, we can observe the performance of the trained model as a function of the number of samples
in Fig. 2c, and we find that if we take typical NISQ infidelity of two-qubit gates today (10−3 ), then around 106
total samples suffice to learn these circuits to that precision. At current repetition rates, this requires only seconds
for a quantum computer in both the learning and inference regimes, while the performance for comparable classical
computations is shown in Fig. 2e. Even compared to the Frontier supercomputer equipped with approximately
18,000 years of runtime, the quantum model mapped to real hardware today exhibits a performance advantage in
learning and generating from this distribution. The inference evaluation is performed for the all-zero input 𝑥 = 0𝑛 ,
whereas the training dataset contains output bitstrings from 𝑥 = 0𝑛 as well as many output bitstrings for random
inputs 𝑥 with varying fractions of 0’s. Observing outputs from different inputs is essential for efficient learning, as
detailed in Appendix C.2.a. This demonstration, together with our theorems, establishes experimental evidence of
generative quantum advantage and further quantifies the crossover for our specific trainable model.


                            Experiments on learning to generate compressed simulation circuits

   Similar to many successes in classical machine learning, our experiments thus far have utilized a specialized
model that facilitates efficient learning, inference, and compatibility with quantum hardware. While it has not
been experimentally demonstrated until now, it has recently been shown that any shallow quantum circuit can be
learned efficiently in the worst case with only product state inputs and local measurements, though this may require
the use of 𝑛 ancilla qubits and greater depth in inference (45 ). This not only has applications in generative learning
                                                                                                                      9

of classical distributions with potentially lower theoretical overhead than IDQNNs, but also opens an entirely new
application domain. Namely, as proven in Theorem 2, even when given an explicit quantum circuit representation
with the promise that a shallow representation exists, it is generally inefficient to find such a representation without
a quantum computer. Hence this shallow learning technique can be used for circuit compression or compilation in
cases where no classical approach would suffice. Moreover, it can be used to exploit hidden structure in problems
to find more efficient representations automatically, which we demonstrate here.
   We demonstrate, as an application of shallow circuit learning, the detection of hidden structure in physical
dynamics. In doing so, we further develop the divide-and-conquer learning algorithm based on the sewing technique
depicted in Fig. 3 from Ref. (45 ). This allows the final inference sewing technique to be implemented at very low,
constant depth and facilitates matching to the layout of the device as shown in Fig. 3. For this experiment in
particular, we focus on learning hidden structure in the physical dynamics of a quantum system initially expressed
as a quantum circuit, e.g., Trotter evolution. We assume we are given access to circuits representing 𝑈 ∑︀ = exp(−𝑖𝐻𝑡)
in polynomial depth for 𝐻 = 𝑉 † 𝐻 ′ 𝑉 , where 𝐻 ′ has a simple, fast-forwardable structure, i.e., 𝐻 ′ = 𝑗 ℎ𝑗 𝑍𝑗 , and
𝑉 is a constant-depth, random unitary. Details of 𝐻 and 𝑈 are given in Appendix I.
   While in specific cases, one may be able to successfully devise the shallow, hidden structure from the circuits alone
classically, as proven in Theorem 2, in the most general case one must run the quantum circuits on a quantum
computer to find the constant-depth representation efficiently. Here we invoke the general divide-and-conquer
strategy to learn and perform inference of this physical system with evolution times 𝑡 ranging from very short to
very long to demonstrate that this technique can locate this hidden, fast-forwardable structure even at very long
times. The results and experimental layout are shown in Fig. 3. We observe that at both short and long times, we
find a high-accuracy representation implementable in constant depth, and even with current experimental errors
we are able to simulate the dynamics to high accuracy using 40 qubits, 20 for the system qubits and 20 for the
ancilla register.


                               Numerical experiments on improved optimization landscape

   As shown in Theorems 4 and 5, a core element enabling efficient learning is the way in which decomposition and
sewing change the landscape of the learning problem. One way of stating this is that the number of local minima
becomes constant as a function of system size for any constant block size of qubits, such that simple restarted local
optimization methods will be successful. As a final numerical experiment, we follow the example problem used in
the proof of Theorems 4 and 5 and evaluate the probability of success upon random restart for an extremely simple
learning target with a model that is tailored to nearly match its structure.
   We observe from the results in Fig. 4 that, as expected, learning the whole problem at once is exponentially
unlikely to succeed, while learning using a divide-and-conquer strategy focusing on constant-sized blocks succeeds
with high probability for any system size. Moreover, the visual depictions of the landscapes show a dramatic and
clear improvement in that there are fewer, higher-quality minima with wider basins of attraction. This suggests
promising directions for designing more general, efficient learning strategies for quantum models of all kinds.


                                                   IV.   Discussion

   Through a combination of theoretical proofs and experimental demonstrations, we close the loop on generative
quantum advantage that began with beyond-classical demonstrations of random circuit sampling and connects here
through efficient learning in the same regimes. For a range of generative tasks, including sampling from classical
distributions, compressing quantum circuits, and learning to generate quantum states, we provided evidence and
helped quantify the resource crossover for definitive beyond-classical performance with modest resources. With the
meteoric rise in interest for classical generative models, including LLMs and diffusion models today, the ability to
learn and sample from entirely new and otherwise inaccessible distributions with relatively few quantum resources
represents an exciting possibility.
   That said, there is substantial work that remains to be done to bring these powerful foundations to fruition
in modern machine learning. The precise remaining steps towards useful generative quantum advantage remain
an open question, but we provide some speculation. First, we believe continuing to expand the classes of models
that are known to be both efficiently trainable and provably hard to sample from will be important. Perhaps as a
next step, we could generalize the approaches here into a regime that naturally supports floating-point and integer
numbers to provide inductive bias matches with real classical data. Second, sharpening the search for practical data
distributions (either classical or quantum) that would be compatible with models that exhibit generative quantum
advantage will be crucial. While continuing to curate classical data will be important, further investigation should
be done to understand the interplay between quantum sensing apparatus coupled to qubits and their quantum
data advantages (7 , 9 ). Finally, much of modern classical machine learning’s success has hinged on the fortuitous
                                                                                                                        10

empirical performance of certain models on real data. Quantum machine learning may follow a similar pattern where
the truly optimal models that exhibit empirical or emergent advantage (52 ) benefit more from their trainability
and hardware efficiency over their perceived expressivity.
  The success of ML has been largely driven by the availability of data, and at its heart, the universe and its data
are quantum. Quantum machine learning has a unique opportunity to take advantage of this data in its natural
form, and we believe that for generative processes involving quantum data, quantum computers will be essential.
While such a victory may also be empirical and emergent as in the history of classical ML, we hope this work sets
the stage for broadly beneficial quantum generative advantage.

                                                   Acknowledgments
  The authors thank Sergio Boixo, Bill Huggins, and David Gosset for detailed comments and discussion on the
draft. The Google Quantum AI team fabricated the processor, built the cryogenic and control systems, optimized
the processor performance, and provided the tools that enabled execution of this experiment. We thank Salvatore
Mandrà and Benjamin Villalonga for help with providing additional data and confirming frontier runtime estimates
and methodologies from (30 ) TABLE 1 when making the beyond classical plot in Figure 2 part (e).




 [1] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, Ł. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is
     all you need,” Advances in neural information processing systems 30 (2017).
 [2] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, “Denoising diffusion probabilistic models,” Advances in neural information processing
     systems 33, 6840 (2020).
 [3] I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, Deep Learning (MIT press, 2016).
 [4] J. Biamonte, P. Wittek, N. Pancotti, P. Rebentrost, N. Wiebe, and S. Lloyd, “Quantum machine learning,” Nature
     549, 195 (2017).
 [5] H.-Y. Huang, R. Kueng, and J. Preskill, “Information-theoretic bounds on quantum advantage in machine learning,”
     Phys. Rev. Lett. 126, 190505 (2021).
 [6] S. Chen, J. Cotler, H.-Y. Huang, and J. Li, “Exponential separations between learning with and without quantum
     memory,” in 2021 IEEE 62nd Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS) (IEEE, 2022) pp.
     574–585.
 [7] H.-Y. Huang, M. Broughton, J. Cotler, S. Chen, J. Li, M. Mohseni, H. Neven, R. Babbush, R. Kueng, J. Preskill, et al.,
     “Quantum advantage in learning from experiments,” Science 376, 1182 (2022).
 [8] S. Aaronson, “Read the fine print,” Nat. Phys. 11, 291 (2015).
 [9] H.-Y. Huang, M. Broughton, M. Mohseni, R. Babbush, S. Boixo, H. Neven, and J. R. McClean, “Power of data in
     quantum machine learning,” Nat. Commun. 12, 1 (2021).
[10] M. Schuld and N. Killoran, “Is quantum advantage the right goal for quantum machine learning?” Prx Quantum 3,
     030101 (2022).
[11] A. Abbas, R. King, H.-Y. Huang, W. J. Huggins, R. Movassagh, D. Gilboa, and J. McClean, “On quantum backprop-
     agation, information reuse, and cheating measurement collapse,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
     36, 44792 (2023).
[12] S. Jaques and A. G. Rattew, “Qram: A survey and critique,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10310 (2023).
[13] N. H. Bshouty and J. C. Jackson, “Learning dnf over the uniform distribution using a quantum example oracle,” in
     Proceedings of the eighth annual conference on Computational learning theory (1995) pp. 118–127.
[14] S. Arunachalam and R. de Wolf, “Guest column: A survey of quantum learning theory,” ACM SIGACT News 48, 41
     (2017).
[15] S. Arunachalam, A. B. Grilo, and H. Yuen, “Quantum statistical query learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.08240
     (2020).
[16] A. Atıcı and R. A. Servedio, “Quantum algorithms for learning and testing juntas,” Quantum Information Processing
     6, 323 (2007).
[17] A. W. Cross, G. Smith, and J. A. Smolin, “Quantum learning robust against noise,” Physical Review A 92, 012327
     (2015).
[18] E. Bernstein and U. Vazirani, “Quantum complexity theory,” in Proceedings of the twenty-fifth annual ACM symposium
     on Theory of computing (1993) pp. 11–20.
[19] L. Lewis, D. Gilboa, and J. R. McClean, “Quantum advantage for learning shallow neural networks with natural data
     distributions,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.20879 (2025).
[20] S. Arunachalam and R. De Wolf, “Optimal quantum sample complexity of learning algorithms,” Journal of Machine
     Learning Research 19, 1 (2018).
[21] A. Atici and R. A. Servedio, “Improved bounds on quantum learning algorithms,” Quantum Information Processing 4,
     355 (2005).
[22] R. A. Servedio and S. J. Gortler, “Equivalences and separations between quantum and classical learnability,” SIAM J.
     Comput. 33, 1067 (2004).
[23] C. Zhang, “An improved lower bound on query complexity for quantum pac learning,” Information Processing Letters
     111, 40 (2010).
                                                                                                                            11

[24] A. Brutzkus and A. Globerson, “Globally optimal gradient descent for a convnet with gaussian inputs,” in International
     conference on machine learning (PMLR, 2017) pp. 605–614.
[25] I. Safran and O. Shamir, “Spurious local minima are common in two-layer ReLU neural networks,” in International
     Conference on Machine Learning (PMLR, 2018) pp. 4433–4441.
[26] A. Daniely and G. Vardi, “Hardness of learning neural networks with natural weights,” Advances in Neural Information
     Processing Systems 33, 930 (2020).
[27] B. T. Kiani, J. Wang, and M. Weber, “Hardness of learning neural networks under the manifold hypothesis,” arXiv
     [cs.LG] (2024).
[28] S. Boixo, S. V. Isakov, V. N. Smelyanskiy, R. Babbush, N. Ding, Z. Jiang, M. J. Bremner, J. M. Martinis, and H. Neven,
     “Characterizing quantum supremacy in near-term devices,” Nature Physics 14, 595 (2018).
[29] F. Arute, K. Arya, R. Babbush, D. Bacon, J. C. Bardin, R. Barends, R. Biswas, S. Boixo, F. G. Brandao, D. A. Buell,
     et al., “Quantum supremacy using a programmable superconducting processor,” Nature 574, 505 (2019).
[30] A. Morvan, B. Villalonga, X. Mi, S. Mandra, A. Bengtsson, P. Klimov, Z. Chen, S. Hong, C. Erickson, I. Drozdov,
     et al., “Phase transitions in random circuit sampling,” Nature 634, 328 (2024).
[31] D. Gao, D. Fan, C. Zha, J. Bei, G. Cai, J. Cai, S. Cao, F. Chen, J. Chen, K. Chen, et al., “Establishing a new benchmark
     in quantum computational advantage with 105-qubit zuchongzhi 3.0 processor,” Physical Review Letters 134, 090601
     (2025).
[32] A. Perdomo-Ortiz, M. Benedetti, J. Realpe-Gómez, and R. Biswas, “Opportunities and challenges for quantum-assisted
     machine learning in near-term quantum computers,” Quantum Science and Technology 3, 030502 (2018).
[33] M. Benedetti, D. Garcia-Pintos, O. Perdomo, V. Leyton-Ortega, Y. Nam, and A. Perdomo-Ortiz, “A generative
     modeling approach for benchmarking and training shallow quantum circuits,” npj Quantum Information 5, 45 (2019).
[34] B. Coyle, D. Mills, V. Danos, and E. Kashefi, “The born supremacy: quantum advantage and training of an ising born
     machine,” npj Quantum Information 6, 60 (2020).
[35] R. Sweke, J.-P. Seifert, D. Hangleiter, and J. Eisert, “On the quantum versus classical learnability of discrete distribu-
     tions,” Quantum 5, 417 (2021).
[36] X. Gao, E. R. Anschuetz, S.-T. Wang, J. I. Cirac, and M. D. Lukin, “Enhancing generative models via quantum
     correlations,” Physical Review X 12, 021037 (2022).
[37] E. Y. Zhu, S. Johri, D. Bacon, M. Esencan, J. Kim, M. Muir, N. Murgai, J. Nguyen, N. Pisenti, A. Schouela, et al.,
     “Generative quantum learning of joint probability distribution functions,” Physical Review Research 4, 043092 (2022).
[38] M. Y. Niu, A. Zlokapa, M. Broughton, S. Boixo, M. Mohseni, V. Smelyanskyi, and H. Neven, “Entangling quantum
     generative adversarial networks,” Physical Review Letters 128, 220505 (2022).
[39] C. A. Riofrio, O. Mitevski, C. Jones, F. Krellner, A. Vuckovic, J. Doetsch, J. Klepsch, T. Ehmer, and A. Luckow, “A
     characterization of quantum generative models,” ACM Transactions on Quantum Computing 5, 1 (2024).
[40] M. S. Rudolph, S. Lerch, S. Thanasilp, O. Kiss, O. Shaya, S. Vallecorsa, M. Grossi, and Z. Holmes, “Trainability
     barriers and opportunities in quantum generative modeling,” npj Quantum Information 10, 116 (2024).
[41] M. Hibat-Allah, M. Mauri, J. Carrasquilla, and A. Perdomo-Ortiz, “A framework for demonstrating practical quantum
     advantage: comparing quantum against classical generative models,” Communications Physics 7, 68 (2024).
[42] J. R. McClean, S. Boixo, V. N. Smelyanskiy, R. Babbush, and H. Neven, “Barren plateaus in quantum neural network
     training landscapes,” Nature communications 9, 4812 (2018).
[43] M. Larocca, S. Thanasilp, S. Wang, K. Sharma, J. Biamonte, P. J. Coles, L. Cincio, J. R. McClean, Z. Holmes, and
     M. Cerezo, “Barren plateaus in variational quantum computing,” Nature Reviews Physics , 1 (2025).
[44] E. R. Anschuetz and B. T. Kiani, “Quantum variational algorithms are swamped with traps,” Nature Communications
     13, 7760 (2022).
[45] H.-Y. Huang, Y. Liu, M. Broughton, I. Kim, A. Anshu, Z. Landau, and J. R. McClean, “Learning shallow quantum
     circuits,” (2024), arXiv:2401.10095 [quant-ph] .
[46] Z. Landau and Y. Liu, “Learning quantum states prepared by shallow circuits in polynomial time,” arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2410.23618 (2024).
[47] B. Fefferman, S. Ghosh, and W. Zhan, “Anti-concentration for the unitary haar measure and applications to random
     quantum circuits,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.19561 (2024).
[48] J. Haah, “Short remarks on shallow unitary circuits,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.14005 (2025).
[49] C. Neill, P. Roushan, K. Kechedzhi, S. Boixo, S. V. Isakov, V. Smelyanskiy, A. Megrant, B. Chiaro, A. Dunsworth,
     K. Arya, et al., “A blueprint for demonstrating quantum supremacy with superconducting qubits,” Science 360, 195
     (2018).
[50] J. Haferkamp, D. Hangleiter, A. Bouland, B. Fefferman, J. Eisert, and J. Bermejo-Vega, “Closing gaps of a quantum
     advantage with short-time hamiltonian dynamics,” Physical Review Letters 125, 250501 (2020).
[51] R. Movassagh, “The hardness of random quantum circuits,” Nature Physics 19, 1719 (2023).
[52] H.-Y. Huang, S. Choi, J. R. McClean, and J. Preskill, “The vast world of quantum advantage,” arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2508.05720 (2025).
[53] H. J. Briegel, D. E. Browne, W. Dür, R. Raussendorf, and M. Van den Nest, “Measurement-based quantum computa-
     tion,” Nature Physics 5, 19 (2009).
[54] S. Bravyi, D. Gosset, and R. Koenig, “Quantum advantage with shallow circuits,” Science 362, 308 (2018).
[55] A. B. Watts, R. Kothari, L. Schaeffer, and A. Tal, “Exponential separation between shallow quantum circuits and
     unbounded fan-in shallow classical circuits,” in Proceedings of the 51st Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of
     Computing, STOC 2019 (Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2019) p. 515–526.
[56] X. Gao, S.-T. Wang, and L.-M. Duan, “Quantum supremacy for simulating a translation-invariant ising spin model,”
     Phys. Rev. Lett. 118, 040502 (2017).
                                                                                                                              12

[57] J. Bermejo-Vega, D. Hangleiter, M. Schwarz, R. Raussendorf, and J. Eisert, “Architectures for quantum simulation
     showing a quantum speedup,” Physical Review X 8, 021010 (2018).
[58] T. Bergamaschi, C.-F. Chen, and Y. Liu, “Quantum computational advantage with constant-temperature gibbs sam-
     pling,” in 2024 IEEE 65th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS) (IEEE, 2024) pp. 1063–1085.
[59] S. Aaronson and Y. Zhang, “On verifiable quantum advantage with peaked circuit sampling,” arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2404.14493 (2024).
[60] M. Y. Niu, A. M. Dai, L. Li, A. Odena, Z. Zhao, V. Smelyanskyi, H. Neven, and S. Boixo, “Learnability and complexity
     of quantum samples,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11983 (2020).
[61] E. Farhi and H. Neven, “Classification with quantum neural networks on near term processors,” (2018), arXiv:1802.06002
     [quant-ph] .
[62] M. Cerezo, A. Sone, T. Volkoff, L. Cincio, and P. J. Coles, “Cost function dependent barren plateaus in shallow
     parametrized quantum circuits,” Nature communications 12, 1791 (2021).
[63] H.-Y. Huang, R. Kueng, and J. Preskill, “Predicting many properties of a quantum system from very few measurements,”
     Nature Physics 16, 1050 (2020).
[64] H.-Y. Huang, R. Kueng, and J. Preskill, “Efficient estimation of pauli observables by derandomization,” Physical review
     letters 127 3, 030503 (2021).
[65] H.-Y. Huang, R. Kueng, G. Torlai, V. V. Albert, and J. Preskill, “Provably efficient machine learning for quantum
     many-body problems,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.12627 (2021).
[66] A. Elben, S. T. Flammia, H.-Y. Huang, R. Kueng, J. Preskill, B. Vermersch, and P. Zoller, “The randomized measure-
     ment toolbox,” Nature Reviews Physics 5, 9 (2023).
[67] R. Acharya, I. Aleiner, R. Allen, T. I. Andersen, M. Ansmann, F. Arute, K. Arya, A. Asfaw, J. Atalaya, R. Babbush,
     D. Bacon, J. C. Bardin, J. Basso, A. Bengtsson, S. Boixo, G. Bortoli, A. Bourassa, J. Bovaird, L. Brill, M. Broughton,
     B. B. Buckley, D. A. Buell, T. Burger, B. Burkett, N. Bushnell, Y. Chen, Z. Chen, B. Chiaro, J. Cogan, R. Collins,
     P. Conner, W. Courtney, A. L. Crook, B. Curtin, D. M. Debroy, A. Del Toro Barba, S. Demura, A. Dunsworth,
     D. Eppens, C. Erickson, L. Faoro, E. Farhi, R. Fatemi, L. Flores Burgos, E. Forati, A. G. Fowler, B. Foxen, W. Giang,
     C. Gidney, D. Gilboa, M. Giustina, A. Grajales Dau, J. A. Gross, S. Habegger, M. C. Hamilton, M. P. Harrigan, S. D.
     Harrington, O. Higgott, J. Hilton, M. Hoffmann, S. Hong, T. Huang, A. Huff, W. J. Huggins, L. B. Ioffe, S. V. Isakov,
     J. Iveland, E. Jeffrey, Z. Jiang, C. Jones, P. Juhas, D. Kafri, K. Kechedzhi, J. Kelly, T. Khattar, M. Khezri, M. Kieferová,
     S. Kim, A. Kitaev, P. V. Klimov, A. R. Klots, A. N. Korotkov, F. Kostritsa, J. M. Kreikebaum, D. Landhuis, P. Laptev,
     K.-M. Lau, L. Laws, J. Lee, K. Lee, B. J. Lester, A. Lill, W. Liu, A. Locharla, E. Lucero, F. D. Malone, J. Marshall,
     O. Martin, J. R. McClean, T. McCourt, M. McEwen, A. Megrant, B. Meurer Costa, X. Mi, K. C. Miao, M. Mohseni,
     S. Montazeri, A. Morvan, E. Mount, W. Mruczkiewicz, O. Naaman, M. Neeley, C. Neill, A. Nersisyan, H. Neven,
     M. Newman, J. H. Ng, A. Nguyen, M. Nguyen, M. Y. Niu, T. E. O’Brien, A. Opremcak, J. Platt, A. Petukhov,
     R. Potter, L. P. Pryadko, C. Quintana, P. Roushan, N. C. Rubin, N. Saei, D. Sank, K. Sankaragomathi, K. J. Satzinger,
     H. F. Schurkus, C. Schuster, M. J. Shearn, A. Shorter, V. Shvarts, J. Skruzny, V. Smelyanskiy, W. C. Smith, G. Sterling,
     D. Strain, M. Szalay, A. Torres, G. Vidal, B. Villalonga, C. Vollgraff Heidweiller, T. White, C. Xing, Z. J. Yao, P. Yeh,
     J. Yoo, G. Young, A. Zalcman, Y. Zhang, N. Zhu, and G. Q. AI, “Suppressing quantum errors by scaling a surface
     code logical qubit,” Nature 614, 676 (2023).
[68] J. Emerson, R. Alicki, and K. Życzkowski, “Scalable noise estimation with random unitary operators,” Journal of Optics
     B: Quantum and Semiclassical Optics 7 (2005).
[69] A. Radford, J. Wu, R. Child, D. Luan, D. Amodei, I. Sutskever, et al., “Language models are unsupervised multitask
     learners,” OpenAI blog 1, 9 (2019).
[70] A. M. Childs, Y. Su, M. C. Tran, N. Wiebe, and S. Zhu, “Theory of trotter error with commutator scaling,” Physical
     Review X 11, 011020 (2021).
[71] G. H. Low and I. L. Chuang, “Optimal hamiltonian simulation by quantum signal processing,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 118,
     010501 (2017).
[72] C. J. Wood, J. D. Biamonte, and D. G. Cory, “Tensor networks and graphical calculus for open quantum systems,”
     (2015), arXiv:1111.6950 [quant-ph] .
[73] C. R. Harris, K. J. Millman, S. J. Van Der Walt, R. Gommers, P. Virtanen, D. Cournapeau, E. Wieser, J. Taylor,
     S. Berg, N. J. Smith, et al., “Array programming with numpy,” Nature 585, 357 (2020).
[74] C. Developers, Cirq (Zenodo, 2025).
[75] M. Broughton, G. Verdon, T. McCourt, A. J. Martinez, J. H. Yoo, S. V. Isakov, P. Massey, M. Y. Niu, R. Halavati, E. Pe-
     ters, et al., “Tensorflow quantum: A software framework for quantum machine learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.02989
     (2020).
[76] H.-Y. Huang, S. Chen, and J. Preskill, “Learning to predict arbitrary quantum processes,” PRX Quantum 4, 040337
     (2023).
[77] H.-Y. Huang, Y. Tong, D. Fang, and Y. Su, “Learning many-body hamiltonians with heisenberg-limited scaling,”
     Physical Review Letters 130, 200403 (2023).
[78] M. C. Caro, H.-Y. Huang, M. Cerezo, K. Sharma, A. Sornborger, L. Cincio, and P. J. Coles, “Generalization in quantum
     machine learning from few training data,” Nature communications 13, 4919 (2022).
[79] M. C. Caro, H.-Y. Huang, N. Ezzell, J. Gibbs, A. T. Sornborger, L. Cincio, P. J. Coles, and Z. Holmes, “Out-of-
     distribution generalization for learning quantum dynamics,” Nature Communications 14, 3751 (2023).
[80] J. Bochnak, M. Coste, and M. Roy, Real Algebraic Geometry, Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete (3),
     Vol. 36 (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1998).
[81] D. E. Knuth and A. C.-C. Yao, “The complexity of nonuniform random number generation,” (1976).
[82] C. H. Bennett, “Logical reversibility of computation,” IBM Journal of Research and Development 17, 525 (1973).
                                                                                                                      13

[83] T. Toffoli, “Reversible computing,” in International colloquium on automata, languages, and programming (Springer,
     1980) pp. 632–644.
[84] M. A. Nielsen and I. L. Chuang, Quantum computation and quantum information (Cambridge university press, 2010).
[85] S. Aaronson, “Quantum computing, postselection, and probabilistic polynomial-time,” Proceedings of the Royal Society
     A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 461, 3473 (2005).
[86] S. Toda, “Pp is as hard as the polynomial-time hierarchy,” SIAM Journal on Computing 20, 865 (1991).
[87] Y. Han, L. A. Hemaspaandra, and T. Thierauf, “Threshold computation and cryptographic security,” SIAM Journal
     on Computing 26, 59 (1997).




                                                  Appendices

                                                       Contents


  I. Introduction                                                                                                      1

 II. Generative quantum advantage                                                                                      3

III. Experimental results                                                                                              6

IV. Discussion                                                                                                         9

     References                                                                                                        10

 A. A brief review on quantum information and computation                                                              14
    A.1. Quantum states and operations                                                                                 14
    A.2. Quantum circuits and complexity classes                                                                       14
    A.3. Quantum channels and distance measures                                                                        15
    A.4. Cross-entropy benchmarking                                                                                    15
    A.5. Quantum learning theory                                                                                       15

 B. Device details                                                                                                     16

 C. Experiments on learning generative model for classical bitstrings                                                  16
    C.1. Problem formulation and experimental setup                                                                    16
    C.2. Numerical methodology                                                                                         17
         C.2.a. Learning the quantum model                                                                             17
         C.2.b. Learning with classical ML models                                                                      19
         C.2.c. Beyond classical performance                                                                           19
    C.3. Experimental implementation                                                                                   20
         C.3.a. Example 1D IDQNN mapping                                                                               21

 D. Experiments on generating quantum circuits to speed up simulation                                                  22
    D.1. Problem formulation and experimental setup                                                                    22
    D.2. Numerical methodology                                                                                         23
    D.3. Experimental implementation                                                                                   25

 E. Numerical experiments on learning SWAP circuits                                                                    26

 F. Mathematical framework for learning shallow quantum circuits                                                       27
    F.1. Dataset                                                                                                       27
    F.2. Algorithm 1: Known structure with direct Heisenberg sewing                                                    27
         F.2.a. Circuit architecture and lightcone structure                                                           27
         F.2.b. Pauli coefficient parameterization                                                                     28
         F.2.c. Loss function                                                                                          28
         F.2.d. Direct Heisenberg sewing                                                                               28
    F.3. Algorithm 2: Known structure with local inversion sewing                                                      29
         F.3.a. Local inversion construction                                                                           29
                                                                                                                    14

          F.3.b. Local inversion sewing                                                                              29
     F.4. Algorithm 3: Unknown structure with local inversion sewing                                                 30
     F.5. Main learning theorem                                                                                      30
     F.6. Technical proofs                                                                                           31

 G. Optimization landscape                                                                                           35
    G.1. Standard landscape has exponentially many local minima                                                      35
         G.1.a. Problem formulation                                                                                  35
         G.1.b. Local cost function                                                                                  36
         G.1.c. Exponentially many suboptimal local minima                                                           36
         G.1.d. Proof of Theorem 9                                                                                   37
    G.2. Our landscape is benign                                                                                     38
         G.2.a. All local minima are global in learning Pauli coefficients                                           38
         G.2.b. Constant local minima in learning local inversions                                                   39

 H. Generative quantum advantage for classical bitstrings                                                            40
    H.1. Problem formulation and universal approximation                                                             40
         H.1.a. Tomographically completeness                                                                         41
         H.1.b. Universal approximation                                                                              41
    H.2. Instantaneously-deep quantum neural networks                                                                42
    H.3. Quantum advantage for learning to generate classical bitstrings                                             45
    H.4. Proof of Theorem 12 and 13                                                                                  46
         H.4.a. Proof of quantum easiness for Theorem 12                                                             46
         H.4.b. Proof of quantum easiness for Theorem 13                                                             47
         H.4.c. Proof of classical hardness for Theorem 13.                                                          47
         H.4.d. Proof of classical hardness for Theorem 12                                                           48

  I. Generative quantum advantage for speeding up simulation                                                         48


                         A.   A brief review on quantum information and computation

  This section provides a concise review of basic concepts and notations in quantum information theory used
throughout the remaining appendices.


                                        A.1.   Quantum states and operations

  In quantum mechanics, a pure state of an 𝑛-qubit system is represented by a unit vector |𝜓⟩ in a 2𝑛 -dimensional
complex Hilbert space ℋ = (C2 )⊗𝑛 . The computational basis states are denoted as |0⟩ , |1⟩ for a single qubit, and
|𝑥⟩ for 𝑥 ∈ {0, 1}𝑛 in the 𝑛-qubit case. A quantum state can exist as a linear combination |𝜓⟩ = 𝑥∈{0,1}𝑛 𝛼𝑥 |𝑥⟩
                                                                                                    ∑︀

with complex amplitudes 𝛼𝑥 satisfying         𝑥 |𝛼𝑥 | = 1. Mixed states, representing statistical ensembles of pure
                                                     2
                                           ∑︀
states, are described by density matrices 𝜌, which are positive ∑︀semidefinite Hermitian operators with unit trace.
For an ensemble given by {(𝑝𝑖 , |𝜓𝑖 ⟩)}, the density matrix is 𝜌 = 𝑖 𝑝𝑖 |𝜓𝑖 ⟩⟨𝜓𝑖 |.
  The evolution of closed quantum systems is governed by unitary operators 𝑈 , satisfying 𝑈 † 𝑈 = 𝑈 𝑈 † = 𝐼.
Measurements in quantum mechanics are described by projection operators. A measurement in the computational
basis transforms the state 𝜌 to |𝑥⟩⟨𝑥| with probability 𝑝(𝑥) = ⟨𝑥| 𝜌 |𝑥⟩. More generally, quantum operations are
described by completely positive trace-preserving (CPTP) maps ℰ, which can be represented using Kraus operators
{𝐸𝑘 } as ℰ(𝜌) = 𝑘 𝐸𝑘 𝜌𝐸𝑘† , where 𝑘 𝐸𝑘† 𝐸𝑘 = 𝐼.
                 ∑︀                  ∑︀



                                 A.2.    Quantum circuits and complexity classes

   Quantum circuits provide a framework for describing quantum computations. The standard building blocks are
single-qubit gates (e.g., Hadamard 𝐻, Pauli gates 𝑋, 𝑌 , 𝑍, 𝑍 rotation gates 𝑅𝑍 (𝜃) = exp(−𝑖𝜃𝑍/2)) and two-qubit
gates (e.g., CNOT, CZ). These gates are universal, meaning any unitary operation can be approximated to arbitrary
                                                                                                                     ⊗𝑛
precision using a finite sequence of these gates. A quantum circuit consists of 𝑛 qubits initialized in the state |0⟩ ,
followed by a sequence of quantum gates, and finally measurement of some or all qubits. The depth of a circuit is
the length of the longest path from input to output, while its size is the total number of gates.
                                                                                                                   15

   Complexity classes categorize computational problems based on the resources required by the algorithms. The
class BQP (Bounded-error Quantum Polynomial time) consists of decision problems solvable with bounded error by
a quantum computer in polynomial time. The class BPP (Bounded-error Probabilistic Polynomial time) consists
of decision problems solvable with bounded error by a classical computer with access to random bits in polynomial
time. The conjecture BPP ̸= BQP posits that quantum computers can efficiently solve problems that classical
computers cannot. We will also consider the class P/poly (Polynomial time with polynomial-size advice) consists of
decision problems solvable with by polynomial-size classical circuits. Adleman’s theorem states that BPP ⊆ P/poly.


                                A.3.    Quantum channels and distance measures

  The total variation distance (TVD) between two probability distributions 𝑝 and 𝑞 is defined as:
                                                          1 ∑︁
                                          TVD(𝑝, 𝑞) =          |𝑝(𝑥) − 𝑞(𝑥)|.                                  (S.3.1)
                                                          2 𝑥

For quantum states, the trace distance between density matrices 𝜌 and 𝜎 is defined as:
                                                              1
                                                 ‖𝜌 − 𝜎‖1 =     Tr|𝜌 − 𝜎|.                                     (S.3.2)
                                                              2
The diamond norm provides a measure for the distance between quantum channels. For CPTP maps ℰ and ℱ , the
diamond norm distance is defined as:

                                       ‖ℰ − ℱ‖◇ = max ‖(ℰ ⊗ 𝐼 − ℱ ⊗ 𝐼)(𝜌)‖1 ,                                  (S.3.3)
                                                      𝜌

where the maximization is over all density matrices 𝜌 of appropriate dimension, including an ancillary system, and
‖ · ‖1 is the trace norm. This measure is operationally significant because it bounds the maximum probability of
distinguishing between two channels by any physical experiment.


                                        A.4.     Cross-entropy benchmarking

  In the development of random circuit sampling (28 , 29 ), an important question is the best way to characterize
high fidelity implementation of the circuits. One family of measures that works well for random circuits is so-called
cross-entropy benchmarking (XEB) (28 ). The metrics in this family assume strong access to the ideal probability
distribution for a bitstring 𝑠, 𝑝(𝑠), typically derived from simulation of the quantum circuit.
  We use the linear XEB fidelity in this work for all cases where XEB is referred to:

                                                       ⟨𝑝(𝑠)⟩𝑠∈𝐸 − ⟨𝑝(𝑠)⟩𝑠∈𝒰
                                         ℱXEB (𝐸) =                          .                                 (S.4.4)
                                                       ⟨𝑝(𝑠)⟩𝑠∈𝑝 − ⟨𝑝(𝑠)⟩𝑠∈𝒰

Here, ⟨⟩𝑠∈𝑆 denotes average over samples from a distribution 𝑆, 𝐸 is the experimental distribution, 𝒰 is the uniform
distribution over bitstrings, and 𝑝 is true distribution for the exact target. In the large system size limit 𝑛 ≫ 1,
this converges to the simpler and more common expression

                                               ℱXEB (𝐸) = ⟨2𝑛 𝑝(𝑠) − 1⟩𝑠∈𝐸                                     (S.4.5)

where 𝑛 is the total number of qubits. While both estimators require the true probability distribution that can be
hard to obtain in general, it can also be used for specialized circuit families where probabilities are easy to obtain
like Clifford circuits to facilitate benchmarking as we do in the main text.


                                         A.5.     Quantum learning theory

  Quantum machine learning explores how quantum systems can be leveraged for learning tasks. A quantum
neural network (QNN) (61 ) is a parameterized quantum circuit 𝑈 (𝜃)⃗ that maps input quantum states to output
quantum states. The parameters 𝜃⃗ are trained to minimize a cost function that depends on the specific learning
task. To overcome the barren plateau problem in QNN training (42 ), where gradients vanish exponentially with
system size, local cost functions are commonly employed (62 ). These functions focus on local properties rather
than global properties, providing more favorable optimization landscapes.
                                                                                                                                                                  16

  Quantum learning theory investigates fundamental questions about what unknown objects are efficiently learn-
able in the quantum world. In this manuscript, we will rely heavily on the classical shadow formalism (63 –66 ).
Classical shadows provide an efficient method to extract classical information from quantum states using ran-
domized measurements. For an unknown state 𝜌, a classical shadow 𝑆𝑇 (𝜌) is constructed from 𝑇 randomized
measurements, which enable the estimation of expectation values of exp(𝒪(𝑇 )) observables up to a small error.


                                                                               B.      Device details

  The experimental data reported in this work was collected on a superconducting qubit processor (29 , 30 ). This
device had 68 qubits with a typical connectivity per-qubit of roughly 3.47. While the detailed per qubit and pair
error rates for this specific experiment are reported below, typical error rates for this architecture are around 10−3
for single qubit gates, 10−2 for two-qubit gates, and 10−2 for measurement operations. We use the same device used
in (30 ) with similar performance. We provide detailed error statistics in Figs. S1, S2 to illustrate the difference
in single qubit and two qubit gate performance. This architecture has enabled both successful surface code error
correction experiments (67 ), and random circuit sampling experiments (29 –31 ) that are expected to require > 1025
years to complete classically with current hardware and algorithms. We employ dynamical decoupling and readout-
debiasing in all of these experiment runs. The following figures provide the benchmarks for the hardware used in
our experiments.

                                                                                     Total SQ Error, RB
                                     Total SQ Error, RB x 1000.0
                                                                                         1.50                   1.00
                                         0.00 2.24
                                         0.707      0.00
                                               0.00 0.791
              1




                                   0.00 0.666
                                   0.609      0.00
                                         0.00 0.557          0.00
                                                             1.23
              2




                                                                                         1.25
                              0.00 0.79
                              0.752      0.00 0.562
                                    0.00 0.685      0.00 0.687
                                               0.00 0.701      0.00
                                                          0.00 0.658
              3




                                                                                                                0.75
                        0.00 0.651
                        0.448      0.00 0.566
                              0.00 0.564 0.00 0.709
                                              0.00 0.00
                                                    1.1 0.701 0.00 0.862
                                                        0.00 1.67  0.00                  1.00
              4




                              0.00 0.564
                              0.946      0.00 1.73
                                    0.00 0.536 0.00 0.807
                                                    0.00 0.707
                                                          0.00 0.601 0.00 0.737
                                                               0.00 0.808 0.00
              5




                                                                                                Empirical CDF




                   0.00 0.697
                   0.661      0.00 0.491
                         0.00 0.557      0.00 0.593
                                    0.00 0.525 0.00 0.572
                                                    0.00 1.57
                                                          0.00 0.941 0.00 0.764
                                                               0.00 0.759 0.00           0.75                   0.50
             row
              6




                        0.00 0.801
                        0.824      0.00 0.76
                              0.00 0.795 0.00 0.619
                                              0.00 1.12
                                                    0.00 0.814 0.00 0.502
                                                         0.00 0.556 0.00
              7




                              0.67
                              0.00 0.725
                                   0.00 0.598
                                         0.00 0.496 0.00 0.71
                                              0.00 0.607 0.00       0.00
                                                                    0.88                 0.50
              8




                                                                                                                0.25
                                   0.00 0.484
                                   0.932      0.00 0.654
                                         0.00 0.618      0.00
                                                    0.00 0.604
              9




                                                                                         0.25
                                         0.00 0.523
                                         0.521      0.00
                                               0.00 0.993
              10




                                                0.00
                                                0.485
              11




                                                                                         0.00                   0.00
                    0     1    2     3     4      5     6      7     8     9    10                                     6 × 10 4          10 3          2 × 10 3
                                               column                                                                             Total SQ Error, RB




Figure S1: Single qubit pauli errors, computed with randomized benchmarking (68 ). We show the Pauli error on each qubit
as well as the integrated histogram with mean and median. To convert between Pauli Error and Average RB error under a
single qubit depolarizing channel we use 𝑝𝑞 = 32 𝜖RB




                         C.        Experiments on learning generative model for classical bitstrings

                                          C.1.          Problem formulation and experimental setup

   Of the applications discussed, perhaps the most interesting is the ability to efficiently learn and sample from hard
classical bitstring distributions as this closes the loop on generative quantum advantage for a problem that may
be specified entirely within the classical domain. Here we consider the task that given an 𝑛 bit string 𝑥 as input,
we wish to sample an 𝑛 bit string 𝑦 from a distribution 𝑝(𝑦|𝑥) where this distribution will be hard to sample from
classically in the large size limit, and 𝑝(𝑦|𝑥) is known through a relatively small number 𝑁 of training samples of
the form (𝑥𝑖 , 𝑦𝑖 ) for 𝑖 from 1 to 𝑁 .
   As a machine learning model, we consider an instantaneously deep quantum neural network (IDQNN) in 3D
with free parameters 𝛽, as detailed in the general case in Appendix H.2, which also elaborates on the learning and
inference procedures. The algorithm proceeds in two parts: training and inference.

                                                     𝑖=1 , we learn the 𝛽’s that completely determine our machine
   1. Training: Given a training dataset {(𝑥𝑖 , 𝑦𝑖 )}𝑁
      learning model. The learning step may be done efficiently classically for this model and to high precision as
                                                                                                                                                                                                  17


                                                                                                                Total XEB Error
                                                      Total XEB Error
                                                                                                                    0.012                   1.00
                                                      0.000.85%0.000.57%0.00




             1
                                                     0.65% 0.67%
                                             0.000.66%0.000.49%0.00              0.00


             2
                                            0.50% 0.62% 1.27%                   0.53%
                                                                                                                    0.010
                                    0.000.41%0.000.41%0.000.50%0.000.54%0.000.74%0.000.51%0.00
             3
                                                                                                                                            0.75
                                   0.56% 0.59% 0.44% 0.70% 0.72% 1.05% 0.88%
                           0.000.61%0.000.46%0.000.58%0.000.61%0.000.53%0.001.17%0.001.04%0.000.76%0.00
             4

                                   0.61% 0.41% 0.64% 0.88% 0.50% 1.39% 1.32% 0.86%
                                    0.000.54%0.000.42%0.000.60%0.000.91%0.000.64%0.000.58%0.000.51%0.000.50%0.00    0.008
             5




                                                                                                                            Empirical CDF
                                   0.53% 0.43% 0.49% 0.73% 0.65% 0.76% 0.70% 0.89% 0.49%
                  0.000.46%0.000.62%0.000.42%0.000.65%0.000.47%0.000.73%0.000.53%0.000.62%0.000.57%0.000.53%0.00                            0.50
            row
             6




                          0.53% 0.45% 0.50% 0.58% 0.48% 0.76% 0.87% 0.67% 0.43%
                           0.000.58%0.000.52%0.000.72%0.000.53%0.000.70%0.000.66%0.000.71%0.000.40%0.00             0.006
             7




                                   0.48% 1.43% 0.53% 0.58% 0.96% 0.51% 0.53%
                                    0.001.03%0.000.48%0.000.62%0.000.45%0.000.62%0.000.55%0.00
             8




                                            0.60% 1.39% 0.53% 0.59% 0.48%
                                                                                                                                            0.25
                                             0.000.73%0.000.43%0.000.55%0.000.78%0.00
             9




                                                     0.56% 1.30% 0.82%                                              0.004
                                                      0.000.81%0.000.46%0.00
             10




                                                              0.45%
                                                               0.00
             11




                                                                                                                    0.002                   0.00
                   0        1        2        3       4        5        6        7        8        9       10                                      4 × 10 3   6 × 10 3                     10 2
                                                            column                                                                                                       Total XEB Error




Figure S2: Two qubit total Pauli error, measured with parallel two qubit XEB (includes single qubit errors as well) (29 ).
We show the error percentage between all couplers in the grid as well as the integrated histogram with mean and median.


      the number of samples 𝑁 scales as 1/𝜀2 for the desired error 𝜀.
   2. Inference: In this step, given any input string 𝑥, we use our trained model on the quantum computer to
      draw samples 𝑦. The quality of the inference is evaluated by cross-entropy benchmarking (XEB) using the
      drawn samples and the true probability distribution 𝑝(𝑦|𝑥) determined by the exact quantum model.
   To evaluate empirical performance at larger sizes than are easy to evaluate exactly with XEB, we use related
Clifford circuits and a technique to map existing beyond-classical results into our framework. Both are detailed in
subsequent sections. We compare to the performance of classical ML models such as transformers and XGBoost
given the same training dataset {(𝑥𝑖 , 𝑦𝑖 )}𝑁𝑖=1 and test input 𝑥. To show that we can learn and perform in the
classically intractable regime, we exploit a correspondence between shallow and deep circuits to map recent beyond-
classical demonstrations (30 ) exactly into our shallow circuit framework.


                                                                                     C.2.              Numerical methodology

                                                                                  C.2.a.               Learning the quantum model

   The shallow quantum generative model that we focus on for this experiment has the important property that
spatially local measurement statistics completely determine the values of 𝛽 and vice versa, while sampling from
the entire, non-local distribution remains hard without a quantum computer. This means that we can efficiently
emulate the learning process on an arbitrarily sized network and understand its behavior as a function of the
number of samples, the size of the network, and the specific distribution from which 𝑥 is drawn.
   To achieve this, we take a model with a given set of 𝛽 parameters and a distribution 𝐷(𝑥) over input bitstrings
𝑥 with a local decoupling property and use it to produce local measurement data for each qubit for a given number
of samples. The local decoupling property requires that for any index 𝑗 in the bitstring 𝑥, the probability that
the neighboring bits of the 𝑗-th bit are 1 while the 𝑗-th bit itself is 0 for an input bitstring 𝑥 drawn from 𝐷 is at
least inverse-polynomial in the system size. This property is satisfied by most input distributions 𝐷(𝑥) that do not
have full support on all-zero or all-one input bitstrings. Examples of distributions that satisfy the local decoupling
property include:
   • Uniform distribution over all input bitstrings.
   • Each bit in the input bitstring is sampled independently and identically distributed (i.i.d.) to be 0 with
     probability 1 − 𝑝 or 1 with probability 𝑝 for any poly(𝑛)
                                                          1                 1
                                                               ≤ 𝑝 ≤ 1 − poly(𝑛) .

   • Any mixture of local-decoupling distributions.
   • Any mixture of distributions such that at least poly(𝑛)
                                                        1
                                                             fraction is local decoupling.
                                                                                                                     18

The local decoupling property allows us to efficiently learn the model parameters 𝛽 for an arbitrarily large system
                                              𝑖=1 with polynomial sample size 𝑁 = poly(𝑛), where 𝑥𝑖 is sampled from
from a classical training dataset {(𝑥𝑖 , 𝑦𝑖 )}𝑁
𝐷 and 𝑦𝑖 is sampled according to the ideal distribution 𝑝(𝑦𝑖 |𝑥𝑖 ).
                                         𝑖=1 , we consider a subset of the classical samples to learn the value of 𝛽 for
   From the training dataset {(𝑥𝑖 , 𝑦𝑖 )}𝑁                                                                          𝑗

any 𝑗. In particular, we focus on the 𝑥𝑖 ’s such that the 𝑗-th bit is 0 while all the bits neighboring bit 𝑗 are 1.
We denote the 𝑗-th bit of the output bitstring 𝑦𝑖 such that the corresponding input bitstring 𝑥𝑖 satisfies the above
              𝑗
condition as 𝑦(𝑡) for 𝑡 from 1 to 𝑁sp . Using this subset of the training set, an empirical estimate for 𝛽 𝑗 is given by
                                                      ⎛                  ⎞
                                                                 𝑁sp
                                              1               1  ∑︁   𝑗
                                         𝛽^𝑗 = arccos ⎝1 − 2         𝑦 ⎠.                                        (S.2.1)
                                              2              𝑁sp 𝑡=1 (𝑡)

This learning procedure is described in more detail in Appendix H.3. The learned values of 𝛽 for a finite sample
size can then be used to define a learned model to be compared in both experiment and simulation to the exact
model. We observe empirically that this learning is extremely efficient even for beyond-classical circuits (described
later) in Fig. 2c, requiring only 106 samples to reach accuracies beyond the precision of current quantum hardware,
achieving typical NISQ infidelity of 10−3 on all gates across the model as determined by the best two-qubit gates
found in highly tuned experiments like Ref. (30 ).
   In the experiments, we consider the distribution 𝐷(𝑥) to be the following:
   • With probability 1/3, every bit in 𝑥 is 0, i.e., 𝑥 = 0𝑛 .
   • With probability 1/3, every bit in 𝑥 is sampled i.i.d. to be 0 with probability 0.6 and 1 with probability 0.4.
   • With probability 1/3, every bit in 𝑥 is sampled i.i.d. to be 0 with probability 0.2 and 1 with probability 0.8.
Since this is a uniform mixture of two local-decoupling distributions and a singleton distribution, 𝐷(𝑥) is a local
decoupling distribution. Hence, the training of the generative quantum model can be performed efficiently even on
a classical computer.
   We intentionally place heavy weight on the all-zero input bitstring 𝑥 = 0𝑛 since we will focus on performing
inference for this input bitstring. This input bitstring 𝑥 = 0𝑛 provides no useful information for learning the
quantum generative model parameters using our proposed method since it lacks any 1 bits. In contrast, having data
from 𝑥 = 0𝑛 makes the task much easier for classical models as they can directly observe the output distributions
for the specific input that will be tested during inference. Note that the learning task remains highly nontrivial
and classically hard even when we provide significant training data on the input bitstring 𝑥 = 0𝑛 to be tested in
the inference stage. This differs from classification tasks where having training data for the test point immediately
reveals the answer to the classifier. For generative tasks, having access to the testing input 𝑥 = 0𝑛 in the training
set can still remain challenging because the generative models must learn the distribution 𝑝(𝑦|𝑥 = 0𝑛 ). One could
imagine asking a large language model to “Create a random cat image,” which remains a nontrivial task even if this
question has appeared many times in its training set since the generative AI model needs to learn how to generate
a random image of a cat.
   As we have shown above, for any locally decoupling distribution 𝐷(𝑥), the learning of the quantum model can be
performed efficiently on a classical computer since it only depends on the local neighborhood. However, inference
on the same quantum model remains hard for a wide range of input bitstrings 𝑥. As shown explicitly in Figure S3,
each bit in 𝑥 equal to 1 corresponds to performing a mid-circuit measurement and qubit reset, whereas each bit
equal to 0 corresponds to performing a quantum gate. As the number of 1’s increases, the inference problem
becomes easier for methods like tensor network simulations that can take advantage of intermediate measurement
results to perform vertex projections. However, as long as the fraction of 1’s is sufficiently low, one should expect
the inference problem to remain computationally hard for classical computers.
   For example, when the probability of having 1 on each bit is poly(𝑛)
                                                                      1
                                                                           and i.i.d., the resulting distribution 𝐷(𝑥)
will satisfy the local decoupling property, and hence the quantum model will remain easy to learn. However,
performing inference on input bitstrings 𝑥 sampled from 𝐷(𝑥) remains hard since having mid-circuit measurement
and reset at a few random locations within a deep quantum circuit remains computationally hard for classical
computers. Furthermore, the study of measurement-induced phase transitions suggests that even when the fraction
of gate locations where a mid-circuit measurement occurs is a constant, when the constant is below a threshold, the
resulting quantum state conditioned on the measurement outcomes will still be highly entangled and hence sampling
from a deep quantum circuit with a small constant fraction of mid-circuit measurements remains classically hard.
Moreover, we note that even in the presence of local, finite temperature thermal noise in the quantum device, the
simulation of shallow quantum circuits similar to the generative quantum models considered in this work is still
expected to be classically hard asymptotically (58 ).
   Clearly, completely cutting a system into pieces via measurement will reduce the classical simulation difficulty.
More generally, the fraction of 1’s could reduce the effective number of qubits substantially for methods like tensor
                                                                                                                      19

network approaches, which must be taken into consideration when trying to identify specific beyond-classical
regimes up to constant factors. Moreover, if one dimension grows much more rapidly in size than the other, shape
bottlenecks may permit additional simulation enhancements that improve classical approximations of the quantum
circuit even further, which must be carefully accounted for. We leave these detailed studies of finite crossovers of
computational hardness transitions as we vary the fraction of 1’s in the input bitstring 𝑥 as open questions.


                                       C.2.b.   Learning with classical ML models

  We compare the performance of all of these cases to state of the art sequence to sequence models on the data
such as transformers and boosting models. The classical input data 𝑥 is input first as the sequence of bits, then
each of the output bits is predicted using the inputs and the previous output bits as input, (𝑥, 𝑦). The order of the
input and output bits is flattened into 1D consistently in each step by unwinding the 3 dimensions in a standard
way to match the input and output formats of these models. In the case of the boosting model, we use independent
boosting models for each output bit in order, trained on the data to predict the next bit.
  In more detail, to compare to classical ML models for the same data, we train a combination of XGBoost and
Transformer models to autoregressively predict the next output bit. We train 𝑑 * 𝑛 XGBoost classifiers (one for
each next bit prediction task) each classifier has the following configuration:

  n_estimators=100, eta=0.3, max_depth=6, subsample=1.0, tree_method=’auto’

  For the transformer model, we use a decoder only architecture with between 106 and 108 parameters (the only
modification is we don’t need token embeddings for a vocabulary of just 0 and 1 bits). We train a single model for
each problem instance with the following configuration

n_layers=4-12, ff_dim=128-1024, n_heads=2-12, hidden_size=32-512

  We train with a linear ramp cosine decay learning rate for 50 epochs. Structurally and intutively these models
are very similar to the GPT2-small networks (69 ).
  Once these three generative models have been "trained", we sample 200000 bitstrings from each of them and
compare the KL divergence as well as the XEB score between these samples and the original problem instance.
This data is plotted in Fig. 2 alongside the data from the quantum models and related Clifford models. We see
that while these models are accurate at very small sizes, their performance quickly degrades in comparison to the
quantum models.
  Both classical models achieve a similar level of performance as the system size grows as quantified by XEB from
the true output distribution. However the performance of both was quite poor, and substantially worse than the
quantum models even implemented with real hardware noise up to scaling. This however, does not address the
question of quantum inspired models powered by advanced classical simulation, which we address subsequently.


                                          C.2.c.   Beyond classical performance

   In order to benchmark the learning and inference steps we run both exact numerical simulations for small sizes
as well as examine a set of related Clifford experiments for which efficient simulation is possible at larger sizes. This
is shown in Fig. 2 d) (left panel). However, this does not directly address the question of learning and inference
with circuits that are believed to be beyond classical, such as those implemented in Ref. (30 ).
   To address performance and learning in the beyond classical regime, we take an approach that utilizes the
universality of our shallow circuit learning distributions, an emulation of the learning process, and existing results
in the literature to provably predict performance. More specifically, we take the following approach:

   1. We take explicit beyond classical circuits from Ref. (30 ), and using the universality of our sampling distri-
      bution, map them into a shallow 3D quantum circuit via refitting to layers of Hadamards and CZ’s as in our
      deep construction, specialized to the case of 𝑥 = 000..., 𝑦 = 000.... This means that in the case of an all 1
      input state and all 0 output, we sample exactly from any particular circuit taken from Ref. (30 ), and for any
      other output state 𝑦, we sample from an equivalently hard circuit with some number of single qubit 𝑍 gates
      randomly injected. This yields our shallow model.
   2. Then, as before, we emulate the training of our model 𝛽s with local sampling and fitting, and study the
      convergence of the error in 𝛽 with respect to number of samples.
                                                                                                                     20

   3. After learning the model to high precision for a number of different samples, we translate these errors back to
      the original circuits, i.e. their original compilations with adjusted parameters, by reversing step 1 numerically.
      We then plot the individual two-qubit gate errors as a function of the number of samples in Fig. 2 c), to show
      that even for these circuits, it is easy to get below the precision of the machine with about 106 samples. We
      define typical NISQ infidelity to be the best value of the two-qubit gate error achieved in Ref. (30 ).

   As we are able to learn from data efficiently in these circuits to beyond the precision of the machine imple-
menting these experiments in addition to an exact circuit correspondence, we use as a proxy for our perfor-
mance on these circuits their reported XEB values. This is plotted in Fig. 2 d) (right panel) with the 3-Patch
data from Ref. (30 ). Also in this plot are the estimated maximum possible fidelities achievable in simulation
with the Frontier supercomputer when allotted different total FLOP budgets. Simulation methods to attempt
to spoof XEB follow closely to the ones described in Ref. (30 ), with key assumptions found in TABLE 1. Us-
ing FrontierFLOPStarget fidelity ≈ FrontierFLOPSperfect fidelity * 𝐹target , where we know FrontierFLOPSperfect fidelity
from Ref. (30 ) and fix FrontierFLOPStarget fidelity to one of 1020 , 1025 , 1030 we can plot the maximum possible
𝐹target XEB fidelities on Frontier for these FLOP budgets. Finally we plot the beyond classical supremacy frontier
(vertical line) corresponding to the beyond classical circuits run in Ref. (30 ). We see from this that our learning
technique achieves generative quantum advantage by performing inference on a select input present in our training
set 𝑥 = 000...0, exploiting the availability of quantum models against both classical models and advanced classical
simulation of quantum models, in the beyond-classical circuit regime.


                                       C.3.   Experimental implementation

   Performing a prototype experiment helps to clarify the concrete steps required and the current state of the art of
quantum hardware. As always, generality is at odds with parsimoniousness of resources, so we make a number of
choices to aid in experimental implementation without explicitly sacrificing opportunities for quantum advantage
in some reasonable limit. Here we detail the experimental design for the generative classical bitstring task.
   As we are implementing on a 2D Sycamore architecture that has as strengths high quality and fast gates, we
consider a shallow 3D, IDQNN model that will be implemented as (2 + 1)D borrowing one dimension for time as
detailed in more generality in Appendix H.2. The input bitstring 𝑥 in the deep model determines both the initial
state, and classically controlled measurement and feedforward operations later in the circuit. The output bitstring
is determined by the measurement of all the qubits in the shallow circuit, or equivalently mid-circuit measurements
in the deep network.
   The results for these experiments and other classical simulations are shown in Fig. 2. To provide a bit more detail
in the presentation of the results we expand on some of the subfigures here. In Fig. 2c, we first map a particular
beyond classical circuit from Ref. (30 ) into the form of our IDQNN circuits. This circuit has 67 physical qubits,
and the mapping into this representation corresponds to the point at the dashed vertical line in Fig. 2e, mapping to
roughly 34, 000 shallow qubits. We then perform a classical simulation of the learning process on the distribution
𝐷(𝑥) for this circuit representative, and evaluate the distribution of gate fidelities with respect to the true gates as
a function of the number of samples, and this is plotted as the violin histogram in Fig. 2c.
   In Fig. 2d, we plot the new experimental results taken on a device in this paper. For our implementation, we
bypass the need for mid circuit measurement by only evaluating the circuits in hardware for the 𝑥 = 000... state
and randomly initializing all but the final layer of 𝑦. This corresponds to the most challenging circuits in terms of
entanglement generation, and hence is a good benchmark for performance.
   To evaluate performance experimentally, we then implement the deep forms of the circuit on the superconducting
quantum processor. Three repetitions of the CZ circuits sketched in Fig. 2a are used, totaling to a model depth
of 12, to balance classical hardness of simulation and experimental fidelity and represents a spatial dimension of
12 represented in the time axis. The total shallow qubits is 12 times the number of physical qubits used in the
deep circuit, which we range up to a maximum value of 𝑛 = 68. This corresponds to a shallow circuit performed
on 816 qubits. In order to control for different sources of error, we implement both the circuits with the ideal
𝛽’s (Q. Expt(Ideal)) and the learned 𝛽’s (Q. Expt(Learned)) from the emulation and learning procedure above,
and evaluate their XEB score with the ideal circuit (Quantum Sim). In simulation, we find that the learning
procedure works to a very high degree of accuracy (XEB score ≈ 1 for all sizes) and in experiment we find that the
learned and ideal values of 𝛽 perform similarly, with degradation only due to finite fidelity of the device. For these
experiments we use a fixed number of samples of 200000 to learn the values of 𝛽 to a finite precision. Moreover, for
each size of circuits we draw 5 independent sets of 𝛽s to repeat the learning and inference process. We note that in
the experiments, we perform only dynamical decoupling during long periods of idling and a basic form of readout
debiasing that involves performing an X gate on all qubits before the end of half the runs, and flipping the values
to collect half the bitstrings in this fashion and half without any additional action. No additional error mitigation
is implemented.
                                                                                                                                                                                     21

                                                                                 Measure to get y[T,1], y[T,2], y[T,3], …, y[T, n]

                                                                   X-basis                                                                                  if x[t,i]=1:
                                Time flows out of plane                                                                                                       Reset qubit to 0
      RZ    RZ    RZ    RZ                        CZ                                                           CZ                CZ
t=T                                                                                                                                                                       to get
                                                                                                                                                              Z
                                                                                                                                                   RZ                     y[t-1,i]
                                                              CZ
                                                                                                                        CZ                CZ                else:
                                                         CZ
                                                                                                                                                               y[t-1,i] = 0/1
…




                                                              CZ                                                                                        H         I / Z
                                                  CZ                                                           CZ                CZ
t=3
                                                                                                                                                                  $       sample
                                                              CZ                                                                                                          y[t-1,i]
                                                         CZ                                                             CZ                CZ
t=2
                                                              CZ                                                                                            if x[t,i]=1:
                                                  CZ                                                           CZ                CZ                RZ
t=1                                                                                                                                                                   I
      i=1   i=2   i=3   i=4   i=5   i=6   i=7   i=8    i=9 i=10                                                                                             else:
                                                                             0    0     0      0     0     0        0        0        0        0
                                                                                                                                                                  H
                   2D Shallow QNN                                                           1D Deep QNN

Figure S3: Example mapping from a shallow 2D IDQNN to its (1+1)D deep representation. On the left, we depict a shallow
circuit on a 2D grid of qubits indexed by (𝑖, 𝑡). It consists of a layer of controlled Hadamards, RZ rotations by a single qubit
parameter 𝛽𝑖,𝑡 , CZ gates indicated by connections between qubits, and measurements in the X basis to map to outputs 𝑦𝑖,𝑡 .
On the right, we depict the deep (1 + 1)D deep mapping amenable to being run on current hardware with time running
from bottom to top, and the physical qubits being those in the lowest layer. The operations are expanded upon in the side
graphic showing the details of feedforward required in general cases, and we include a pseudo-code description of both in
Appendix C.3.a for additional clarity.


   In order to predict performance of quantum learning at sizes that are not easy to simulate and verify classically,
we also implement a set of Clifford test experiments (Q. Expt Clifford). This is done by taking the 𝛽’s that define
the shallow learning model, and rounding 2𝛽/𝜋 to the nearest integer to give a related Clifford model. Note that
this model is evaluated with respect to the ideal Clifford model rather than the ideal original 𝛽 circuit. This
model can then be evaluated efficiently classically, and used to check the accuracy of the corresponding model
in the quantum case. We observe that up until the point we cannot predict performance classically, this model
tracks the experimental performance extremely well with regards to XEB. This model allows us to observe strong
experimental performance up to the equivalent of 816 shallow qubits by using our deep model.
   In Fig. 2e, we use the circuits from mapped from Ref. (30 ) into our IDQNN model to determine the number of
shallow qubits that would be in our model, and use the simulation and performance data from that same work to
establish what the XEB would be for a high performance classical simulation of the same data. We note that this
inference is once again for the 𝑥 = 000...0 input, which maximizes the classical hardness. Although the learned
circuit in Fig. 2c is the same circuit, it is learned on a different input distribution, and we discuss the expected
changes in hardness if one were to do inference on a broad class of distributions in Appendix C.2.a.


                                                           C.3.a.      Example 1D IDQNN mapping

   The description of the most general IDQNN found in Appendix. H.2 can be made easier to understand through
a simple example on 4 qubits, where the model is shallow in 2𝐷 and the mapping to (1 + 1)𝐷 is easy to visualize in
a quantum circuit diagram. For illustration purposes, in 1D at small sizes the deep representation of the shallow
circuit may be depicted as in Fig. S3
   To make this figure more clear, we spell out here the steps on the shallow circuit in 2D as well as the equivalent
construction for a deep 1D circuit in the following pseudocode. We assume that the 2D shallow model is defined by
a graph 𝐺 that has qubits as nodes and connections between them as edges. For simplicity and maximum classical
hardness, we assume here the time direction is fully connected, and the non-trivial edges will only be needed in the
spatial direction. For example, see the gray lines in Fig. S3 on the 2D Shallow QNN. The shallow and deep models
are equivalent in that given the inputs 𝑥 indexed by (𝑡, 𝑖), they sample the bits 𝑦 also indexed by (𝑡, 𝑖) with precisely
the same probability. The equivalent shallow and deep models are made more explicit by their implementations
which we precisely give as Algorithm 1 and 2.
                                                                                                                           22

                                               Algorithm 1 2D Shallow Model
Input: inputs {𝑥𝑡,𝑖 }
    𝑇 total time.
    𝐺 is a 2D graph with node labels indexing qubits by (𝑡, 𝑖).
    𝛽𝑡,𝑖 are the model parameters.
    The final circuit will be 2D shallow on 𝑇 * 𝑁 qubits.
Output: Bitstring measurements {𝑦𝑡,𝑖 }.
  1 Initialize all qubits to the state |0⟩.
              1−𝑥𝑡,𝑖
  2 Apply 𝐻          to all qubits (𝑡, 𝑖).
  3 Apply 𝑅𝑍 (𝛽𝑡,𝑖 ) to all qubits (𝑡, 𝑖).
  4 Apply CZ gates between all neighboring qubits.                      ◁ Neighbors are defined by the edges in 𝐺, see Fig. S3
  5 Measure all qubits (𝑡, 𝑖) in the X-basis.
  6 Assign the measurement result for qubit (𝑡, 𝑖) to the classical bit 𝑦𝑡,𝑖 .



                                              Algorithm 2 (1+1)D Deep Model
Input: Input {𝑥𝑡,𝑖 }.
    𝑇 total time.
    𝐺 is a 2D graph with node labels indexing qubits by (𝑡, 𝑖).
    𝛽𝑡,𝑖 are the model parameters.
    The final circuit will be 1D Deep on 𝑁 qubits
Output: Bitstring measurements {𝑦𝑡,𝑖 }.
  1 Initialize all qubits to the state |0⟩.
  2 Initialize all bits 𝑦𝑡,𝑖 randomly to 0 or 1 with equal probability.
                                                                                                  ◁ Operations at time 𝑡 = 1
             1−𝑥
 3 Apply 𝐻    1,𝑖
                   to all qubits 𝑖.
 4 Apply 𝑅𝑍 (𝛽1,𝑖 ) to all qubits 𝑖.
 5 for all edges ((1, 𝑖), (1, 𝑗)) in 𝐺 do
 6     Apply CZ gate between qubits 𝑖 and 𝑗.
                                                                                       ◁ Main loop for time steps 𝑡 = 2 to 𝑇
 7 for 𝑡 ← 2 to 𝑇 do
 8     for all edges ((𝑡, 𝑖), (𝑡, 𝑗)) in 𝐺 do
 9        Apply CZ gate between qubits 𝑖 and 𝑗.
10     for all qubits 𝑖 do
11        Apply 𝐻 1−𝑥𝑡,𝑖 to qubit 𝑖.
12        if 𝑥𝑡,𝑖 = 1 then
13            Measure qubit 𝑖 in the Z-basis and assign the result to 𝑦𝑡−1,𝑖 .
14        Apply 𝑍 𝑦𝑡−1,𝑖 followed by 𝑅𝑍 (𝛽𝑡,𝑖 ) to qubit 𝑖.
                                                                                             ◁ Final measurement at time 𝑇
15 for all qubits 𝑖 at time 𝑇 do
16    Measure qubit 𝑖 in the X-basis and assign the result to 𝑦𝑇,𝑖 .



                    D.    Experiments on generating quantum circuits to speed up simulation

                                 D.1.       Problem formulation and experimental setup

  We consider the problem where we are given a local Hamiltonian:
                                                      ∑︁
                                                 𝐻=      ℎ𝑖 ,                                                         (S.1.1)
                                                                 𝑖

where each ℎ𝑖 is a Hermitian operator acting on a constant number of qubits in an 𝑛-qubit system, and an evolution
time 𝑡. Our objective is to efficiently implement the 𝑛-qubit unitary:

                                                       𝑈 = exp(−𝑖𝑡𝐻),                                                 (S.1.2)

on a quantum device. For most quantum simulation algorithms, 𝑈 would require a very deep quantum circuit,
especially for long evolution times 𝑡. However, when the Hamiltonian possesses certain inherent structures, one
may be able to implement 𝑈 with a significantly more efficient quantum circuit at some times or at all times. Our
goal is to develop an algorithm that automatically generates a low-depth circuit implementation of 𝑈 when such
an implementation exists.
  The learning algorithm can operate in two distinct modes:
                                                                                                                         23

   1. Classical simulation: Perform Heisenberg evolution of local operators under 𝐻 via light-cone simulation
      to learn the local inversions of the unitary 𝑈 .
   2. Quantum simulation: Utilize quantum algorithms (e.g., Trotter (70 ) or QSP (71 )) to simulate Hamiltonian
      dynamics under 𝐻 and learn the local inversions of the unitary 𝑈 .
If a low-depth implementation of the unitary 𝑈 exists, one can learn local inversions that are low-depth. Then one
can compile the local inversions into a low-depth circuit implementation of 𝑈 . Classical simulation (Mode 1) works
efficiently when the Hamiltonian dynamics exhibits a slowly growing light cone. Recall that even though observable
light cone simulation is efficient here, taking samples from the final circuit in inference is still classically intractable
in the most general case. Using classical simulation has the significant advantage of not requiring the execution
of any deep quantum circuits on quantum hardware during the learning process and generally much better scaling
as a function of precision. Only after a low-depth circuit is generated do we need to use quantum hardware to
implement 𝑈 . In contrast, quantum simulation (Mode 2) remains viable even when the Hamiltonian dynamics
produces a very large light cone during intermediate evolution times (though at the final time 𝑡, the existence of a
low-depth implementation of 𝑈 implies that the light cone must eventually contract).
   Mode 1 is particularly suitable for near-term and early fault-tolerant quantum computers where implementing
deep quantum circuits is prohibitively challenging. Mode 2 is designed for future large-scale fault-tolerant quantum
computers where we can execute deep quantum circuits a limited number of times to gather necessary data, after
which we can deploy the much more efficient circuit implementation to evolve under 𝑈 . In our current experiments,
we focus on Mode 1, as we do not yet have access to a full-fledged fault-tolerant quantum computer.
   The remainder of this appendix describes the details of our experiments, divided into numerical methodology
and experimental implementation. In the numerical methodology subsection, we elaborate on how the classical
simulation and the learning of local inversions are performed for a family of Hamiltonians exhibiting slowly-growing
light cones. In the experimental implementation subsection, we detail how we generate a low-depth circuit for
implementing the time-evolved operator 𝑈 = exp(−𝑖𝑡𝐻) for times 𝑡 ≥ 20000, how we map this circuit onto a
Sycamore quantum processor, our data collection procedures, and subsequent data processing techniques.


                                            D.2.    Numerical methodology

   From the problem formulation, the goal is to develop an algorithm that automatically generates a low-depth
circuit implementation of 𝑈 = exp(−𝑖𝑡𝐻). In this experiment, we consider 𝐻 to be a known 1D local Hamiltonian
with a given spatial geometry. To find a low-depth circuit implementation of 𝑈 , we utilize a learning algorithm
that focuses on finding local inversions of 𝑘 qubits under the action of the unitary 𝑈 on 𝑛 ≥ 𝑘 qubits. Depending
on the level of knowledge of the structure of the unknown unitary, there are a number of strategies that can be
employed to efficiently determine both the structure and content of the local inversion, as detailed in Ref. (45 ).
   If we operate in Mode 2 (Quantum Simulation), we can obtain local measurements from each of the possible local
bases of the 𝑘 input qubits ({|0⟩ , |1⟩ , |+⟩ , |−⟩ , |+𝑦⟩ , |−𝑦⟩}) and the known lightcones of those 𝑘 input qubits in
a procedure analogous to classical shadows (63 ) and described in more detail in Appendix F. This method allows
one to efficiently determine the local inversion for each of the groups of 𝑘 qubits using only samples from the device
with a modest number of measurements. However, as a sampling procedure it has a scaling of poly(𝜖−1 ) and for
small systems where one has more knowledge of the unitary it can be advantageous to use a different procedure.
   In particular, we consider operating in Mode 1 (Classical simulation) where the light cone is small enough to
be simulated efficiently for some time. This allows us to study the training procedure with a lower overhead than
sampling while keeping the loss landscape and phenomenological features of learning the same. In particular, for
the known full unitary 𝑈 and a trial unitary that we are optimizing over 𝑈𝑡 , we directly implement the loss function
                                                               (︁    )︁
                                                    ||Tr𝑛∖𝑘 ℒ 𝑈 𝑈𝑡† − 𝐼4 ||22
                                                ∑︁
                                                                                                                (S.2.3)
                                                𝑘

where ℒ(𝐴) is the superoperator map, and the trace Tr𝑛∖𝑘 is taken over all qubits except the input qubit 𝑘, such
that the resulting map is 4 dimensional in its superoperator matrix representation and the difference with the
identity, 𝐼4 , can be computed. Note that the actions of taking an operator to its super operator and partial trace
require some nuance to correctly implement as detailed in Ref. (72 ), and our notation hides some of that detail.
For efficiency, one can truncate qubit elements and gates of 𝑈 and 𝑈𝑡 not in the relevant lightcones which allows
this procedure to be efficient as a function of the number of qubits.
  For each of the ansatz described above, we utilize random restarts with the circuit parameters initialized uniformly
in the interval [0, 1). After initialization, we train the circuits with either ADAM or gradient descent with a
backtracking line search (BGD). We note that while ADAM is expected to perform well in either case, BGD is only
expected to perform well with a deterministic or high precision cost function like we expect in Mode 1. In such
                                                                                                                      24

cases it can be much more efficient than a standard learning schedule, but it is not generally as robust to stochastic
sampling techniques.
   For ADAM we use a fairly standard set of learning parameters 𝛽1 = 0.85, 𝛽2 = 0.9995, 𝜖 = 10−8 with a learning
rate that we vary between 0.1 and 0.5. For BGD we use 𝛼 = 0.5, 𝛽 = 0.8 with 𝛼 setting the threshold for decrease
and 𝛽 setting the geometric decrease factor, and we similarly vary the step size / learning rate between 0.1 and
0.5. For both methods we take 150 iterations for all experiments.
   Due to the deterministic nature of the cost function for Mode 1, it is safe to take as the best point for each
training run that which had the lowest overall cost function value. For each target set of qubits we are optimizing
over, we take the best optima from all restarts to define the local inversion for that set of qubits. We then combine
the best local inversion for each subset of qubits to find the full circuit.
   In order to evaluate the difficulty of learning the circuit with a given grouping of qubits, for example with a
single qubit, 4 qubits, or the whole circuit, we look at the probability of success upon restart of successful learning.
Due to the way in which we group qubits and can learn each qubit block independently, this definition is a little
bit nuanced. Specifically, we define success within a qubit block, as the maximum error for the channel for any
individual qubit to be below a threshold 𝛿 = 10−2 . Then, because the cost is dominated by the number of restarts
required to succeed on the hardest block of qubits, we take the overall success probability for a given grouping to
be the minimum success probability across the blocks. Together this defines the numerical success probability for
learning the circuit as
                                              [︂             (︁     )︁           ]︂
                                      min Pr max ||Tr𝑛∖𝑘 ℒ 𝑈 𝑈𝑖𝑡† − 𝐼4 ||22 ≤ 𝛿                                  (S.2.4)
                                        𝐵𝑖            𝑘∈𝐵𝑖

where 𝐵𝑖 are the qubit blocks in the grouping and 𝑈𝑖𝑡 is the trial local inversion specialized to qubit block 𝐵𝑖 .
  To examine the case of compressing physical evolution circuits with hidden structure, we consider physical
evolutions of Hamiltonians of separable Hamiltonians hidden by constant depth circuits. More specifically, consider
the Hamiltonian
                                                     ⎛           ⎞
                                                       ∑︁
                                             𝐻 = 𝑈† ⎝      ℎ𝑗 𝑍𝑗 ⎠ 𝑈                                          (S.2.5)
                                                                       𝑗


where ℎ𝑗 is draw uniformly at random from [−1, 1], 𝑍𝑗 is the Pauli Z operator on the 𝑗’th qubit, and 𝑈 is a constant
depth random unitary. In this case, we construct 𝑈 as a 1D random unitary, where in the first layer random phased
XZ gates are added to each pair of adjacent qubits starting from qubit 1, followed by a CZ gate between the
qubits, followed by another set of phased XZ gates on each of the qubits. This is then repeated starting at qubit
2, such that a 1D brickwork is created. The PhasedXZ gate is defined as Ph𝑋𝑍 = 𝑍 −𝑎 𝑋 𝑥 𝑍 𝑎 𝑍 𝑧 in time-order left
to right, where 𝑋, 𝑍 are Pauli operators, and 𝑥, 𝑧, 𝑎 are fixed precision numbers taken in the interval [0, 4]. In our
experiments, 𝑥, 𝑧, 𝑎 are initialized uniformly at random inside the interval [0, 4]. As an example on 4 qubits, with
each of the gates randomized independently,

                                 Ph(𝑥1 , 𝑧 1 , 𝑎1 )     ∙     Ph(𝑥2 , 𝑧 2 , 𝑎2 )          Ph(𝑥3 , 𝑧 3 , 𝑎3 )      (S.2.6)


                                 Ph(𝑥4 , 𝑧 4 , 𝑎4 )     ∙     Ph(𝑥5 , 𝑧 5 , 𝑎5 )     ∙    Ph(𝑥6 , 𝑧 6 , 𝑎6 )


                                 Ph(𝑥7 , 𝑧 7 , 𝑎7 )     ∙     Ph(𝑥8 , 𝑧 8 , 𝑎8 )     ∙    Ph(𝑥9 , 𝑧 9 , 𝑎9 )


                               Ph(𝑥10 , 𝑧 10 , 𝑎10 )    ∙    Ph(𝑥11 , 𝑧 11 , 𝑎11 )       Ph(𝑥12 , 𝑧 12 , 𝑎12 )

   Once the scrambling unitary 𝑈 has been fixed, we use it to express the time evolution circuits for the physical
simulation. If one were to naively expand 𝑈 𝐻𝑈 † into Pauli terms, without recognizing the overall structure,
implementing this naively with CNOT ladders under Trotterization, parallelizing over qubit blocks, and performing
a single term at a time is untenable at reasonable levels of noise today on almost any processor.
   However, for this particular Hamiltonian, the time-evolution circuit obviously has a simple form for any time
𝑡 ∈ R, namely the unitary 𝑈 , 𝑅𝑧 (−2ℎ𝑗 𝑡) applied to all qubits, and the inverse 𝑈 † , where 𝑅𝑧 (𝜃) is a parameterized
rotation about 𝑍 by 𝜃 equivalent to exp(−𝑖𝑍𝜃/2). This structure can be learned even without detailed knowledge
of its presence via the sewing technique. We use this circuit to simulate the time-dynamics across a range of time
steps at both short and long times. Namely, 𝑡 ∈ 3𝜋/40 * 𝑘 + 0.001 ∀ 𝑘 ∈ [0, 40] ∪ [106 , 106 + 40], and we read out
⟨𝑍𝑗 ⟩ for each qubit 𝑗.
   For learning these circuits, we use Mode 1 of Classical Simulation as described above on blocks of 4 qubits, further
described in the experimental implementation section. We use an ansatz that trains on single qubit rotations around
                                                                                                                                                      25

𝑥, 𝑦, and 𝑧, with a fixed 2 qubit gate structure that respects the symmetry of performing both a 𝑈 and 𝑈 † . In
particular, we use

           R(𝑥1 , 𝑦 1 , 𝑧 1 )    ∙     R(𝑥2 , 𝑦 2 , 𝑧 2 )           R(𝑥3 , 𝑦 3 , 𝑧 3 )          R(𝑥4 , 𝑦 4 , 𝑧 4 )    ∙     R(𝑥5 , 𝑦 5 , 𝑧 5 )    (S.2.7)


           R(𝑥6 , 𝑦 6 , 𝑧 6 )    ∙     R(𝑥7 , 𝑦 7 , 𝑧 7 )    ∙      R(𝑥8 , 𝑦 8 , 𝑧 8 )    ∙     R(𝑥9 , 𝑦 9 , 𝑧 9 )    ∙   R(𝑥10 , 𝑦 10 , 𝑧 10 )


         R(𝑥11 , 𝑦 11 , 𝑧 11 )   ∙   R(𝑥12 , 𝑦 12 , 𝑧 12 )   ∙    R(𝑥13 , 𝑦 13 , 𝑧 13 )   ∙   R(𝑥14 , 𝑦 14 , 𝑧 14 )   ∙   R(𝑥15 , 𝑦 15 , 𝑧 15 )


         R(𝑥16 , 𝑦 16 , 𝑧 16 )   ∙   R(𝑥17 , 𝑦 17 , 𝑧 17 )        R(𝑥18 , 𝑦 18 , 𝑧 18 )       R(𝑥19 , 𝑦 19 , 𝑧 19 )   ∙   R(𝑥20 , 𝑦 20 , 𝑧 20 )

   for a 4-qubit circuit, where R(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧) = R𝑋 (𝑥)R𝑌 (𝑦)R𝑍 (𝑧), R𝑃 (𝜃) = exp(−𝑖𝑃 𝜃/2), and every 𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧 in the
ansatz are allowed to vary independently, and are initialized randomly uniformly in [0, 1). We note that several of
the internal rotations could be combined into a single rotation, but that does not nessecarily preserve the overall
training landscape, and this is the precise form used in our learning experiments here.
   We save optimizer state and metrics along the way and save the results for all trials run. For the combination of
the compressing physical dynamics and SWAP circuits, we run approximately 24,000 trial runs with 150 optimizer
steps each across a variety of different ansatz and starting conditions as described above. These simulation runs
were carried out using a combination of Numpy (73 ), Cirq (74 ) and TFQ (75 ) on GCP with a total FLOP budget
of around 1017 (O(1) ExaFLOPs) in total compute - not FLOPs per second).


                                                     D.3.        Experimental implementation

   For this experiment, we are testing the more general learning approach described in Appendix F, that requires
𝑛 ancilla qubits to utilize the sewing method. Both the scrambling unitary that is used to hide the Hamiltonian
and the ansatz circuit are defined in 1D, and this structure is mimicked in the experimental layout. In particular,
within the 2D grid of Sycamore, these experiments were laid out on a 1D line on the chip with available ancilla
for each qubit on the line on either side (the line is connected with each neighbor, but the ancilla are not). We
took 200000 samples for each problem instance circuit and computed the qubit mean values across qubits within
the circuit for different values of time. For these experiments we utilized up to 40 physical qubits, with 20 used for
the system and 20 used for the ancilla register in sewing.
   An important consideration in experimental implementation using the sewing trick is to minimize the circuit
depth if possible. This both lowers exposure to decoherence errors and improves the time to execute a given circuit
for any given implementation. The learning technique as described in Appendix F discusses only the case of a
single qubit local inversion where learning is the easiest, but one may learn local inversions for blocks of qubits at
a time, and so long as the block size is a constant the learning remains efficient (see next section as well). This is
reflected in the cost function for training in Mode 1 that is summed over all the qubits in a learning block. While
the learning becomes more challenging with a larger block size, there are sometimes experimental benefits in the
inference step to using larger blocks, such as shorter depth circuits or opportunities for parallelism.
   In this experiment, we choose an experimental block size of 𝑘 = 4. To see why this is an advantageous choice,
consider the layout mapped in Fig. 3b that demonstrates this scheme allows execution of the circuit in a depth of 2
layers. For a single qubit in 1D, the scrambling circuit we are considering can spread the light cone 3 qubits up and
3 qubits down from the block under consideration, which represents the blocking light cone of that local inversion.
If one does a single qubit local inversion, the light cone blocks up to 7 qubits from having actions performed on
them for other local inversions, while implementing the action for only a single qubit. Hence, while a constant depth
implementation is possible, the depth is likely to need to be at least 7, which makes experimental implementation
in conjunction with the sewing trick unwieldy. In contrast, if the qubit block size is 4 and judiciously chosen,
then only 2 qubits on either side of the block are impeded, and 4 qubits are implemented at a time. This means
the overall circuit can be implemented in depth 2 repetitions of the local inversions, a substantial improvement in
implementation efficiency.
   For the chip being used, the CZ is a native hardware gate that is individually calibrated. The CZ connectivity
is displayed by the couplers between qubits on the superconducting qubit grid depicted in Fig. 3a. For the single
qubit gates, we compile into PhasedXZ gates, and the single qubit error rate has a typical value of 10−3 .
   The raw results are quite good due to the quality of the device, but here we describe a simple error mitigation
technique that further improved the results with respect to the exact solution. This error mitigation technique is
only used in the inference step, as the learning is done classically in Mode 1 as described. When the ansatz circuit
above sets all the trainable parameters to 0, it is logically the identity circuit. If we perform no circuit cancellation
at that point, and run it on the device, it experiences a structurally very similar noise pattern to the true circuit,
                                                                                                                    26

but with exactly known reference values. Denote this faulty identity channel as ℰ. For a given observable on
qubit 𝑖, 𝑂𝑖 with measurement outcomes {0, 1}, we define the zero and one reference values as the values of those
observables measured on the all 0 state |000...⟩.
  That is, let

                                                𝜌0 = ℰ [|000...⟩ ⟨000...|]                                      (S.3.8)
                                               𝑂𝑖0 = Tr[𝜌0 𝑂𝑖 ]                                                 (S.3.9)

with these reference values, we define the error mitigated observables as
                                                            ⟨𝑂𝑖 ⟩ − 𝑂𝑖0
                                                𝑀 (𝑂𝑖 ) =                                                     (S.3.10)
                                                             1 − 2𝑂𝑖0
where ⟨𝑂𝑖 ⟩ is the empirically measured expected value of 𝑂𝑖 on the ansatz circuit with the desired parameters.
For Pauli operators 𝑃𝑖 , we relate them to an 𝑂𝑖 via 𝑂𝑖 = 1 − (𝑃𝑖 + 1)/2. Empirically we find that this mitigation
technique improves the results, though we note the raw values are quite good as well for these experiments as can
be seen in Figs. 3c and 3d.


                            E.   Numerical experiments on learning SWAP circuits

   In order to best isolate the consequences for efficiency of training, we also run numerical experiments on extremely
simple circuits for which we have analytical results on the landscapes and detailed analysis in Appendix G.1. More
specifically, we design experiments to study the probability of success as a function of the system size and size of
the block under consideration in terms of the proliferation of local minima. This has a direct consequence in terms
of the probability of success of restarted local descent methods as described in Appendix D.2, and the probability of
success described in Eq. S.2.4 is evaluated and plotted in Fig. D.2. Here, we focus on an extremely simple example
to control for excess complications, namely a classical circuit that SWAPs every 4th qubit. More explicitly one
may write this circuit as

                                                            ×                                                   (S.0.1)



                                                          ×
repeated over all disjoint groups of 4 qubits, arranged in 1D. To further emphasize the essential challenges, we
also use a stilted ansatz that closely mimics the form of the target circuit with only slightly different connectivity.
Explicitly we use


                                                                                                                (S.0.2)
                                     𝑝0,0                                 𝑝0,1
                              SWAP                                SWAP
                                                     1,0                                 1,1
                                             SWAP𝑝                               SWAP𝑝
                                      2,0                                  2,1
                              SWAP𝑝                               SWAP𝑝


   where each 𝑝𝑖,𝑗 is allowed to be independently initialized and optimized, the gate SWAP𝑝 is the SWAP gate
raised to the 𝑝’th power, and this is two layers of of nearest neighbor SWAPs in 1D, clearly capable of expressing
the SWAP-4 target circuit. Perhaps surprisingly, without the use of the sewing trick, even with knowledge of the
circuit structure, it is incredibly hard to learn due to the proliferation of local minima in the training landscape.
As this circuit is classical, this is a consequence of circuit architecture and information readout rather than gen-
uinely quantum effects, however divide and conquer learning combined with the sewing trick is able to overcome
this limitation regardless. The SWAP gate to the 𝑝’th power has the more specific matrix representation in the
computational basis
                                          ⎛                                             ⎞
                                             1         0                   0          0
                                          ⎜ 0 𝑒𝑖𝜋𝑝/2 cos(𝜋𝑝/2) −𝑖𝑒𝑖𝜋𝑝/2 sin(𝜋𝑝/2) 0 ⎟
                               SWAP𝑝 = ⎜  ⎝ 0 −𝑖𝑒𝑖𝜋𝑝/2 sin(𝜋𝑝/2) 𝑒𝑖𝜋𝑝/2 cos(𝜋𝑝/2) 0 ⎠
                                                                                        ⎟                      (S.0.3)
                                             0         0                   0          1
                                                                                                                        27

   However, the sewing technique allows one to fix the number of qubits under consideration in the target, and
scalable stop the proliferation of local minima, allowing simple restart and local minimization to be an efficient
strategy. For any fixed number of target qubits 𝑘. In this work, we compare 𝑘 = 1 and 𝑘 = 4 to the cost of learning
the whole circuit with this ansatz and empirically support the exponential advantage at practical sizes of interest.
   We use the same methods as outlined in Appendix D.2 to fit the above ansatz circuits and determine their
probability of success. For this set of experiments, we restrict ourselves to numerical simulation.


                      F.     Mathematical framework for learning shallow quantum circuits

   In this appendix, we present the mathematical framework for learning and training shallow quantum circuits
from a classical dataset.


                                                     F.1.    Dataset

  Our approach uses a classical dataset obtained from randomized measurements on the unknown quantum circuit.
The dataset construction procedure is as follows:
Definition 6 (Randomized measurement dataset). Given an unknown 𝑛-qubit unitary 𝑈 , a randomized measure-
ment dataset of size 𝑁 is constructed as:
                                          {︃        𝑛                    𝑛
                                                                                   }︃𝑁
                                                   ⨂︁                   ⨂︁
                                𝒯𝑈 (𝑁 ) = |𝜓ℓ ⟩ =     |𝜓ℓ,𝑖 ⟩ , |𝜑ℓ ⟩ =    |𝜑ℓ,𝑖 ⟩     ,             (S.1.1)
                                                      𝑖=1                𝑖=1         ℓ=1

where each sample is obtained through the following procedure:
                                                    ⨂︀𝑛
  1. Sample an input product state |𝜓ℓ ⟩ =             𝑖=1 |𝜓ℓ,𝑖 ⟩, with each |𝜓ℓ,𝑖 ⟩ being a uniformly random single-qubit
     stabilizer state from {|0⟩ , |1⟩ , |+⟩ , |−⟩ , |𝑦+⟩ , |𝑦−⟩}.
   2. Apply the unknown unitary 𝑈 to |𝜓ℓ ⟩.
                                       a random Pauli basis chosen from {𝑋, 𝑌, 𝑍}. The measurement collapses the
   3. Measure each qubit of 𝑈 |𝜓ℓ ⟩ in⨂︀
                                         𝑛
      state to a product state |𝜑ℓ ⟩ = 𝑖=1 |𝜑ℓ,𝑖 ⟩.
This dataset can be represented efficiently on a classical computer using 𝒪(𝑁 𝑛) bits.


                      F.2.    Algorithm 1: Known structure with direct Heisenberg sewing

  We begin by presenting an algorithm for learning a shallow quantum neural network when both the geometric
connectivity and circuit architecture are known. Our goal is to learn an unknown 𝑛-qubit unitary 𝑈 that belongs
to a specified parameterized circuit family.


                                   F.2.a.   Circuit architecture and lightcone structure

  Consider a parameterized quantum circuit architecture 𝒜. While the architecture is known, the specific gate
parameters, and hence the particular unitary 𝑈 ∈ 𝒜 we wish to learn, are unknown. The key insight is that the
geometric structure of 𝒜 constrains the support of Heisenberg-evolved Pauli observables.
Definition 7 (Backward lightcone for circuit architecture). For a constant-depth circuit architecture 𝒜 and qubit
𝑖 ∈ {1, . . . , 𝑛}, the backward lightcone 𝐶𝑖 is the maximal set of qubits that can influence the 𝑖-th qubit output
across all possible unitaries in the architecture:

                     𝐶𝑖 = {𝑗 ∈ {1, . . . , 𝑛} : ∃𝑃 ∈ {𝑋, 𝑌, 𝑍}, 𝑈 ∈ 𝒜, such that [𝑈 † 𝑃𝑖 𝑈, 𝑃𝑗 ] ̸= 0}.            (S.2.2)

Since 𝒜 consists of constant-depth circuits, we have |𝐶𝑖 | = 𝒪(1) for all 𝑖.
  The lightcones {𝐶𝑖 }𝑛𝑖=1 are determined purely by the circuit architecture and can be computed efficiently from
the geometric connectivity pattern. For any specific unitary 𝑈 ∈ 𝒜, the Heisenberg-evolved observables 𝑈 † 𝑃𝑖 𝑈
have support contained within 𝐶𝑖 .
                                                                                                                              28

                                         F.2.b.   Pauli coefficient parameterization

  We parameterize the Heisenberg-evolved observables directly through their Pauli decompositions:
Definition 8 (Pauli coefficient parameterization). For each qubit 𝑖 ∈ {1, . . . , 𝑛} and single-qubit Pauli observable
𝑃 ∈ {𝑋, 𝑌, 𝑍}, we parameterize:
                                                        ∑︁
                                          𝑈 † 𝑃𝑖 𝑈 =          𝛼𝑃𝑖 ,𝑄 𝑄,                                        (S.2.3)
                                                             𝑄∈Pauli(𝐶𝑖 )

where
                              Pauli(𝐶𝑖 ) = {𝑄 ∈ {𝐼, 𝑋, 𝑌, 𝑍}⊗𝑛 : 𝑄𝑗 = 𝐼 for all 𝑗 ∈
                                                                                  / 𝐶𝑖 }                                  (S.2.4)
                                                                                                       ⃗ . The total
is the set of Pauli operators supported on the lightcone 𝐶𝑖 . We denote the entire parameter vector as 𝛼
number of parameters is 3𝑛 · max𝑖 4|𝐶𝑖 | = 𝒪(𝑛), since each |𝐶𝑖 | = 𝒪(1).


                                                    F.2.c.      Loss function

  Given the randomized measurement dataset 𝒯𝑈 (𝑁 ), we define the loss function:
                             𝑁    𝑛                                                                                ⃒2
                         1 ∑︁ ∑︁         ∑︁            ∑︁        ⃒
                ℒ(⃗
                  𝛼) =                                           ⃒𝛼𝑃𝑖 ,𝑄 − 3|𝑄|+1 ⟨𝜑ℓ,𝑖 | 𝑃 |𝜑ℓ,𝑖 ⟩ · ⟨𝜓ℓ | 𝑄 |𝜓ℓ ⟩⃒ .    (S.2.5)
                                                                 ⃒                                                 ⃒
                         𝑁    𝑖=1
                            ℓ=1       𝑃 ∈{𝑋,𝑌,𝑍} 𝑄∈Pauli(𝐶𝑖 )

This is a standard least-squares optimization in the parameter space. As we will demonstrate rigorously in Sec-
tion G.2.a, this optimization problem is strongly convex and possesses a unique global minimum 𝛼    ⃗ * , ensuring that
∑︀ local optimization
any                        algorithm will converge to the optimal solution. Furthermore, it is not hard to show that
   𝑄∈Pauli(𝐶𝑖 ) 𝛼𝑃𝑖 ,𝑄 𝑄 ≈ 𝑈 𝑃𝑖 𝑈 up to an 𝜖 error under ‖·‖∞ using a dataset 𝒯𝑈 (𝑁 ) of size 𝑁 = 𝒪(1/𝜖 ).
                 *           †                                                                            2




                                              F.2.d.   Direct Heisenberg sewing

Definition 9 (Direct Heisenberg sewing). Given learned coefficients 𝛼 ⃗ * , we construct the sewed 2𝑛-qubit unitary
through direct projection of Heisenberg operators. For each qubit 𝑖, define the sewing operator:
                                        1        1   ∑︁        ∑︁
                                  𝛼* ) = 𝐼 ⊗ 𝐼 +
                              𝒮𝑖 (⃗                                             *
                                                                         𝑃𝑖 ⊗ 𝛼 𝑃 𝑖 ,𝑄
                                                                                       𝑄.                    (S.2.6)
                                        2        2
                                                        𝑃 ∈{𝑋,𝑌,𝑍} 𝑄∈Pauli(𝐶𝑖 )

               𝛼* ) may not be unitary, we apply unitary projection ProjU (·), where for a matrix 𝑀 :
Since each 𝒮𝑖 (⃗
                                      ProjU (𝑀 ) = arg        min         ‖𝑈 − 𝑀 ‖2𝐹 = 𝑉 𝑊 †                              (S.2.7)
                                                            𝑈 :𝑈 † 𝑈 =𝐼

if 𝑀 = 𝑉 Σ𝑊 † is the singular value decomposition. The complete sewed unitary is:
                                                        [︃ 𝑛                 ]︃
                                                          ∏︁
                                        Heis
                                      𝑈sew    𝛼* ) := 𝑆
                                             (⃗                         𝛼* )) ,
                                                             ProjU (𝒮𝑖 (⃗                                                 (S.2.8)
                                                                 𝑖=1

where 𝑆 denotes the global swap operator between the two 𝑛-qubit registers. The learned 𝑛-qubit channel is:
                                              (︁                            (︀ Heis * )︀† )︁
                            ℰ^Heis (𝜌) := Tr≤𝑛 𝑈sew
                                                 Heis
                                                       𝛼* ) (|0𝑛 ⟩⟨0𝑛 | ⊗ 𝜌) 𝑈sew
                                                      (⃗                           (⃗
                                                                                    𝛼 )      .          (S.2.9)

   We can obtain an upper bound on the error between the learned channel ℰ^Heis and the ideal unitary channel
𝒰(·) = 𝑈 (·)𝑈 † as follows. The proof of Theorem 6 is deferred to Section F.6.
Theorem 6 (Error bound on direct Heisenberg sewing).⃦Given an unknown 𝑛-qubit unitary         ⃦  𝑈 and learned coef-
         ⃗ such that for each 𝑖 ∈ {1, . . . , 𝑛}, 𝑃 ∈{𝑋,𝑌,𝑍} ⃦ 𝑄∈Pauli(𝐶𝑖 ) 𝛼𝑃𝑖 ,𝑄 𝑄 − 𝑈 𝑃𝑖 𝑈 ⃦ ≤ 𝜀𝑖 , then:
ficients 𝛼 *                                                                 *          †
                                                 ∑︀          ⃦∑︀                              ⃦
                                                                                                           ∞
                                                                                  𝑛
                                                                                 ∑︁
                                              Heis
                                            ‖𝑈sew   𝛼 * ) − 𝑈 † ⊗ 𝑈 ‖∞ ≤
                                                   (⃗                                  𝜀𝑖 .                              (S.2.10)
                                                                                 𝑖=1
               ⃦           ⃦    ∑︀𝑛
Hence, we have ⃦ℰ^Heis − 𝒰 ⃦ ≤ 2 𝑖=1 𝜀𝑖 .
               ⃦           ⃦
                             ◇
                                                                                                                     29

                       F.3.       Algorithm 2: Known structure with local inversion sewing

  The second algorithm learns the same Heisenberg-evolved observables but replaces the unitary group projection
with local inversion training for each qubit to construct the final circuit.


                                            F.3.a.   Local inversion construction

  We begin with the general concept of local inversion before specializing to our learned coefficients.
Definition 10 (𝜀-approximate local inversion). Given 𝑛-qubit unitaries 𝑈 and 𝑉𝑖 , we say 𝑉𝑖 is an 𝜀-approximate
local inversion of 𝑈 on the 𝑖-th qubit if:

                                                 ‖𝑉𝑖† 𝑈 † 𝑃𝑖 𝑈 𝑉𝑖 − 𝑃𝑖 ‖∞ ≤ 𝜀
                                           ∑︁
                                                                                                        (S.3.11)
                                            𝑃 ∈{𝑋,𝑌,𝑍}

where 𝑃𝑖 denotes the Pauli operator 𝑃 acting on the 𝑖-th qubit and identity on all other qubits.
                                 ⃗ * from the convex optimization, we construct local inversion unitaries:
  Given the learned coefficients 𝛼
Definition 11 (Local inversion from coefficients). For each qubit 𝑖, define the target operator:
                                                       ∑︁
                                             ^ 𝑖,𝑃 =
                                             𝑂                𝛼𝑃*
                                                                  𝑖 ,𝑄
                                                                       𝑄.                                  (S.3.12)
                                                          𝑄∈Pauli(𝐶𝑖 )

The local inversion 𝑉𝑖 is optimized to satisfy:

                                                         ‖𝑉𝑖† 𝑂
                                             ∑︁
                                                              ^ 𝑖,𝑃 𝑉𝑖 − 𝑃𝑖 ‖∞ ≤ 𝜀𝑖 .                          (S.3.13)
                                            𝑃 ∈{𝑋,𝑌,𝑍}


  Since 𝑂^ 𝑖,𝑃 has support on a constant-size lightcone 𝐶𝑖 , the local inversion 𝑉𝑖 can be constrained to act only
on a constant number of qubits and have constant depth. Since 𝑉𝑖 acts on 𝒪(1) qubits, the optimization can
be performed using various methods, such as brute-force search, gradient descent with restart, L-BFGS, Newton
method, Bayesian optimization. All of these approaches have constant runtime for any fixed 𝜀𝑖 due to the constant
dimensionality of the optimization space. Furthermore, the optimization landscape will only contain a constant
number of local minima due to the constant dimensionality; see Section G.2.b.


                                                F.3.b.   Local inversion sewing

Definition 12 (Sewing local inversions). Given 𝑛-qubit unitaries 𝑉1 , . . . , 𝑉𝑛 , define the sewed 2𝑛-qubit unitary as:
                                                            [︃ 𝑛                       ]︃
                                                                            (︁      )︁
                                                                               †
                                                              ∏︁
                                 inv
                               𝑈sew (𝑉1 , . . . , 𝑉𝑛 ) := 𝑆      (𝑉𝑖 ⊗ 𝐼) 𝑆𝑖 𝑉𝑖 ⊗ 𝐼 ,                           (S.3.14)
                                                               𝑖=1

where 𝑆𝑖 is the swap operator for the 𝑖-th qubit between the two 𝑛-qubit systems, and 𝑆 is the swap operator for
all 𝑛 qubits. The learned 𝑛-qubit channel is then defined as:

                                       ℰ^inv (𝜌) := Tr>𝑛 (𝑈sew
                                                           inv                   inv †
                                                               (𝜌 ⊗ |0𝑛 ⟩⟨0𝑛 |)(𝑈sew ) ).                      (S.3.15)

  We can obtain an upper bound on the error between the learned channel ℰ^inv and the ideal unitary channel
𝒰(·) = 𝑈 (·)𝑈 † as follows. The proof of Theorem 7 is deferred to Section F.6.
Theorem 7 (Error bound on sewing local inversions). Given an unknown 𝑛-qubit unitary 𝑈 , if 𝑉𝑖 is an 𝜀𝑖 -
approximate local inversion of 𝑈 on the 𝑖-th qubit for each 𝑖, then:
                                                                                     𝑛
                                                                                  1 ∑︁
                                        ‖𝑈sew (𝑉1 , . . . , 𝑉𝑛 ) − 𝑈 ⊗ 𝑈 † ‖∞ ≤         𝜀𝑖 .                   (S.3.16)
                                                                                  2 𝑖=1
               ⃦          ⃦  ∑︀𝑛
Hence, we have ⃦ℰ^inv − 𝒰 ⃦ ≤ 𝑖=1 𝜀𝑖 .
               ⃦          ⃦
                              ◇
                                                                                                                     30

                      F.4.   Algorithm 3: Unknown structure with local inversion sewing

  When the circuit architecture is unknown, we cannot precompute the lightcones 𝐶𝑖 . Instead, we must learn the
support structure of the Heisenberg-evolved observables. This can be achieved using the algorithm from Lemma 1
below, then proceed with local inversion sewing as in Algorithm 2. The algorithm proceeds as follows:
                                                                    ^ 𝑖,𝑃 ≈ 𝑈 † 𝑃𝑖 𝑈 .
   1. Use Lemma 1 to learn the Heisenberg-evolved Pauli observables 𝑂

   2. For each qubit 𝑖, optimize a local inversion 𝑉𝑖 such that 𝑉𝑖† 𝑂
                                                                    ^ 𝑖,𝑃 𝑉𝑖 ≈ 𝑃𝑖 as in Algorithm 2.

   3. Apply local inversion sewing as in Algorithm 2 to obtain the learned channel ℰ(𝜌).
                                                                                   ^

In the following, we state the main lemma for learning the Heisenberg-evolved observables from the dataset 𝒯𝑈 (𝑁 )
with an arbitrary circuit architecture for the unknown shallow quantum neural network.
Lemma 1 (Learning Heisenberg-evolved Pauli observables). Given an unknown 𝑛-qubit unitary 𝑈 implemented
by a constant-depth circuit, a failure probability 𝛿, an error parameter 𝜀, and a randomized measurement dataset
𝒯𝑈 (𝑁 ) of size
                                                     (︂ 𝒪(𝑘)          )︂
                                                       2     log(𝑛/𝛿)
                                             𝑁 =𝒪                        ,                                (S.4.17)
                                                              𝜀2

where 𝑘 = 𝒪(1) is the maximum size of the lightcone in the circuit, we can learn approximations 𝑂        ^ 𝑖,𝑃 to each
Heisenberg-evolved Pauli observable 𝑈 𝑃𝑖 𝑈 for 𝑖 ∈ {1, . . . , 𝑛} and 𝑃 ∈ {𝑋, 𝑌, 𝑍} using the following algorithm:
                                     †


   1. For all 𝑄 ∈ {𝐼, 𝑋, 𝑌, 𝑍}⊗𝑛 with |𝑄| ≤ 𝑘, i.e., 𝑄 acts as non-identity on at most 𝑘 qubits, compute the
      coefficient:
                                                        𝑁
                                                3|𝑄| ∑︁
                                         𝛼
                                         ^𝑄 =           3 ⟨𝜑ℓ,𝑖 | 𝑃 |𝜑ℓ,𝑖 ⟩ · ⟨𝜓ℓ | 𝑄 |𝜓ℓ ⟩ ,                   (S.4.18)
                                                 𝑁
                                                     ℓ=1

      then apply a threshold function to the coefficient:
                                                 {︃                       √
                                           ^               𝛼𝑄 | ≥ 0.5𝜀/(2 2)𝑘
                                                    ^ 𝑄 , |^
                                                    𝛼
                                           𝛽𝑄 =                           √    .                                (S.4.19)
                                                   0,      ^ 𝑄 | < 0.5𝜀/(2 2)𝑘
                                                          |𝛼

   2. Construct the approximation as:
                                                                  ∑︁
                                                     ^ 𝑖,𝑃 =
                                                     𝑂                    𝛽^𝑄 𝑄.                                (S.4.20)
                                                                𝑄:|𝑄|≤𝑘


This algorithm guarantees that with probability at least 1 − 𝛿:
                              ^ 𝑖,𝑃 − 𝑈 † 𝑃𝑖 𝑈 ‖∞ ≤ 𝜀
                             ‖𝑂                             and supp(𝑂
                                                                     ^ 𝑖,𝑃 ) ⊆ supp(𝑈 † 𝑃𝑖 𝑈 )                  (S.4.21)

for all 𝑖 ∈ {1, . . . , 𝑛} and 𝑃 ∈ {𝑋, 𝑌, 𝑍}, where supp(𝐴) is the set of qubits that 𝐴 acts nontrivially on.


                                           F.5.    Main learning theorem

Theorem 8 (Learning shallow quantum circuits). Given a failure probability 𝛿, an approximation error 𝜀, and an
unknown 𝑛-qubit unitary 𝑈 generated by a constant-depth circuit, with a randomized measurement dataset 𝒯𝑈 (𝑁 )
of size
                                                  (︂ 2          )︂
                                                    𝑛 log(𝑛/𝛿)
                                           𝑁 =𝒪                    ,                                   (S.5.22)
                                                        𝜀2

we can learn an 𝑛-qubit quantum channel ℰ^ that can be implemented by a constant-depth quantum circuit over
2𝑛 qubits, such that

                                                     ‖ℰ^ − 𝒰‖◇ ≤ 𝜀,                                             (S.5.23)

with probability at least 1 − 𝛿.
                                                                                                                    31

Proof. The proof proceeds by applying our learning algorithm and analyzing its performance guarantees. First,
we apply Lemma 1 with error parameter 𝜀′ = 6𝑛        𝜀
                                                       to learn approximations 𝑂 ^ 𝑖,𝑃 to the Heisenberg-evolved Pauli
observables 𝑈 𝑃𝑖 𝑈 for all 𝑖 ∈ {1, . . . , 𝑛} and 𝑃 ∈ {𝑋, 𝑌, 𝑍}. With probability at least 1 − 2𝛿 , we have:
             †

                                                                           𝜀
                                                  ^ 𝑖,𝑃 − 𝑈 † 𝑃𝑖 𝑈 ‖∞ ≤
                                                 ‖𝑂                          .                                 (S.5.24)
                                                                          6𝑛
Second, for each qubit 𝑖, we train a local inversion unitary 𝑉𝑖 to minimize:

                                                     ‖𝑈 † 𝑉𝑖† 𝑃𝑖 𝑉𝑖 𝑈 − 𝑃𝑖 ‖∞ .
                                              ∑︁
                                                                                                               (S.5.25)
                                             𝑃 ∈{𝑋,𝑌,𝑍}

Since 𝑈 is a constant-depth circuit, the Heisenberg-evolved observables 𝑈 † 𝑃𝑖 𝑈 have bounded support of size 𝒪(1).
This means the local inversion unitaries 𝑉𝑖 can also be constrained to be 𝒪(1) depth and act only on 𝒪(1) qubits.
By optimizing over this constant-sized space, we can find local inversions 𝑉𝑖 such that
                                                                           𝜀
                                                 ‖𝑈 † 𝑉𝑖† 𝑃𝑖 𝑉𝑖 𝑈 − 𝑃𝑖 ‖∞ ≤ .
                                          ∑︁
                                                                                                           (S.5.26)
                                                                           𝑛
                                          𝑃 ∈{𝑋,𝑌,𝑍}

Third, we construct the sewed unitary 𝑈sew (𝑉1 , . . . , 𝑉𝑛 ) according to Definition 2. By Theorem 7,
                                                                                 𝑛
                                                                              1 ∑︁ 𝜀   𝜀
                                    ‖𝑈sew (𝑉1 , . . . , 𝑉𝑛 ) − 𝑈 † ⊗ 𝑈 ‖∞ ≤           = .                      (S.5.27)
                                                                              2 𝑖=1 𝑛  2

Finally, we define our learned channel as:
                                          ^
                                          ℰ(𝜌)                                †
                                               := Tr>𝑛 (𝑈sew (|0𝑛 ⟩⟨0𝑛 | ⊗ 𝜌)𝑈sew ).                           (S.5.28)
The diamond distance between our learned channel and the target channel is:
          ‖ℰ^ − 𝒰‖◇ = ‖Tr>𝑛 (𝑈sew (|0𝑛 ⟩⟨0𝑛 | ⊗ ·)𝑈sew
                                                   †
                                                       ) − 𝑈 (·)𝑈 † ‖◇                                         (S.5.29)
                                                    †
                     = ‖Tr>𝑛 (𝑈sew (|0𝑛 ⟩⟨0𝑛 | ⊗ ·)𝑈sew ) − Tr>𝑛 ((𝑈 † ⊗ 𝑈 )(|0𝑛 ⟩⟨0𝑛 | ⊗ ·)(𝑈 † ⊗ 𝑈 )† )‖◇    (S.5.30)
                                                     𝜀
                     ≤ 2‖𝑈sew − 𝑈 † ⊗ 𝑈 ‖∞ ≤ 2 · = 𝜀,                                                          (S.5.31)
                                                     2
where we used the fact that for channels derived from unitaries, the diamond norm is bounded by twice the spectral
norm of the difference between the unitaries. The implementation of ℰ^ as a constant-depth quantum circuit over
2𝑛 qubits follows from the fact that each 𝑉𝑖 has constant depth and acts on a constant number of qubits. If we
implement the sewing construction in a chosen order, we can preserve the constant-depth property of the overall
circuit. Therefore, with probability at least 1 − 𝛿, we can learn an 𝑛-qubit quantum channel ℰ^ that approximates
𝒰 with diamond distance at most 𝜀 using 𝑁 = 𝒪(𝑛2 log(𝑛/𝛿)/𝜀2 ) samples, and this channel can be implemented
by a constant-depth quantum circuit over 2𝑛 qubits.
   In the case of geometrically-local circuits with a fixed geometry (such as 1D, 2D, or 3D lattices), both the
computational complexity and the implementation of the learned channel can be further optimized to maintain
the geometric locality of the original system. In the experiments in the main text regarding compressing circuits
or speeding up simulation as well as Appendix D, we choose to learn on constant blocks of size 4 on a line, as
this reduces the overall block complexity to a constant of 2, easing experimental implementation. This is depicted
visually in Fig. 3b. This is also explored in our numerical experiments detailed in Appendix E regarding local
minima, where we show that any constant block size learning improves the learning landscape over attempting to
learn the circuit all at once.


                                                  F.6.    Technical proofs

Proof of Theorem 7. Because (𝑈 ⊗ 𝐼)(𝑈 † ⊗ 𝐼) = 𝐼 ⊗ 𝐼, we have
                    𝑆(𝑈 † ⊗ 𝐼)𝑆𝑛 (𝑈 ⊗ 𝐼) . . . (𝑈 † ⊗ 𝐼)𝑆1 (𝑈 ⊗ 𝐼) = 𝑆(𝑈 † ⊗ 𝐼)𝑆(𝑈 ⊗ 𝐼) = 𝑈 ⊗ 𝑈 † .            (S.6.32)
From triangle inequality and telescoping sum, we have
                                                   𝑛 ⃦              (︁         )︁                      ⃦
                                                                         †
                                                  ∑︁
           ⃦𝑈sew (𝑉1 , . . . , 𝑉𝑛 ) − 𝑈 ⊗ 𝑈 † ⃦ ≤                                      †
                                                                                                               (S.6.33)
           ⃦                                  ⃦
                                                           ⊗ 𝐼) 𝑆      𝑉   ⊗ 𝐼    − (𝑈   ⊗ 𝐼)𝑆  (𝑈 ⊗ 𝐼)    .
                                                     ⃦                                                 ⃦
                                               ∞
                                                     ⃦(𝑉 𝑖        𝑖     𝑖                     𝑖        ⃦
                                                                                                       ∞
                                                 𝑖=1
                                                                                                                             32

For each term in the sum, note that the swap operator 𝑆𝑖 can be expressed as:
                                            1        1    ∑︁
                                       𝑆𝑖 = 𝐼 ⊗ 𝐼 +              𝑃𝑖 ⊗ 𝑃 𝑖                                               (S.6.34)
                                            2        2
                                                              𝑃 ∈{𝑋,𝑌,𝑍}

This gives us:
                                  ⃦            (︁       )︁                       ⃦
                                                  †
                                  ⃦(𝑉𝑖 ⊗ 𝐼) 𝑆𝑖 𝑉𝑖 ⊗ 𝐼 − (𝑈 † ⊗ 𝐼)𝑆𝑖 (𝑈 ⊗ 𝐼)⃦                                            (S.6.35)
                                  ⃦                                              ⃦
                                                                                  ∞
                                     1     ∑︁     ⃦(︁
                                                              †
                                                                   )︁               ⃦
                                  ≤               ⃦ 𝑉𝑖 𝑃𝑖 𝑉𝑖 ⊗ 𝑃𝑖 − (𝑈 † 𝑃𝑖 𝑈 ⊗ 𝑃𝑖 )⃦                                   (S.6.36)
                                                  ⃦                                 ⃦
                                     2                                               ∞
                                       𝑃 ∈{𝑋,𝑌,𝑍}
                                     1     ∑︁     ⃦
                                                             †
                                                                               ⃦
                                  =               ⃦(𝑉𝑖 𝑃𝑖 𝑉𝑖 − 𝑈 † 𝑃𝑖 𝑈 ) ⊗ 𝑃𝑖 ⃦                                        (S.6.37)
                                                  ⃦                            ⃦
                                     2                                          ∞
                                       𝑃 ∈{𝑋,𝑌,𝑍}
                                     1     ∑︁     ⃦
                                                           †
                                                                       ⃦
                                  =               ⃦𝑉𝑖 𝑃𝑖 𝑉𝑖 − 𝑈 † 𝑃𝑖 𝑈 ⃦ .                                              (S.6.38)
                                                  ⃦                    ⃦
                                     2                                  ∞
                                       𝑃 ∈{𝑋,𝑌,𝑍}

Now, we use the definition of 𝜀𝑖 -approximate local inversion. By the unitary invariance of the operator norm, we
have:
                                   ⃦                    ⃦   ⃦                    ⃦
                                            †                       †
                                   ⃦𝑉𝑖 𝑃𝑖 𝑉𝑖 − 𝑈 † 𝑃𝑖 𝑈 ⃦ = ⃦𝑃𝑖 − 𝑉𝑖 𝑈 † 𝑃𝑖 𝑈 𝑉𝑖 ⃦ .                      (S.6.39)
                                   ⃦                    ⃦   ⃦                    ⃦
                                                          ∞                                ∞

Therefore:
        ⃦           (︁
                       †
                           )︁                    ⃦                1      ∑︁        ⃦
                                                                                           †
                                                                                                        ⃦        𝜀𝑖
        ⃦(𝑉𝑖 ⊗ 𝐼) 𝑆𝑖 𝑉𝑖 ⊗ 𝐼 − (𝑈 † ⊗ 𝐼)𝑆𝑖 (𝑈 ⊗ 𝐼)⃦            ≤                    ⃦𝑃𝑖 − 𝑉𝑖 𝑈 † 𝑃𝑖 𝑈 𝑉𝑖 ⃦    ≤      .   (S.6.40)
        ⃦                                        ⃦                                 ⃦                    ⃦
                                                          ∞       2                                      ∞       2
                                                                      𝑃 ∈{𝑋,𝑌,𝑍}

Finally, combining these bounds:
                                                                               𝑛
                                                                              ∑︁  𝜀𝑖
                                       ⃦𝑈sew (𝑉1 , . . . , 𝑉𝑛 ) − 𝑈 ⊗ 𝑈 † ⃦ ≤                                           (S.6.41)
                                       ⃦                                  ⃦
                                                                           ∞
                                                                                     .
                                                                              𝑖=1
                                                                                  2

This completes the proof.
Proof of Theorem 6. Let 𝑂 ^ 𝑖,𝑃 = ∑︀
                                    𝑄∈Pauli(𝐶𝑖 ) 𝛼𝑃𝑖 ,𝑄 𝑄 be our learned Heisenberg-evolved operators. We utilize the
                                                  *

key identity that the ideal construction gives:
                                                ⎡                                     ⎤
                                            𝑛
                                           ∏︁     1         1     ∑︁
                                 †
                               𝑈 ⊗𝑈 =𝑆          ⎣ 𝐼 ⊗𝐼 +                       †
                                                                        𝑃𝑖 ⊗ (𝑈 𝑃𝑖 𝑈 )⎦ .                   (S.6.42)
                                           𝑖=1
                                                  2         2
                                                                  𝑃 ∈{𝑋,𝑌,𝑍}

This follows from the swap decomposition 𝑆𝑖 = 21 𝐼 ⊗ 𝐼 + 2 𝑃 ∈{𝑋,𝑌,𝑍} 𝑃𝑖 ⊗ 𝑃𝑖 and the identity (𝑈 † ⊗ 𝐼)𝑆𝑖 (𝑈 ⊗ 𝐼) =
                                                              1
                                                                ∑︀

               𝑃 𝑃𝑖 ⊗ (𝑈 𝑃𝑖 𝑈 ). We define the ideal, approximate, and projected operators respectively:
1         1             †
            ∑︀
2𝐼 ⊗ 𝐼 + 2

                                               1        1      ∑︁
                                       𝑉𝑖 :=     𝐼 ⊗𝐼 +                   𝑃𝑖 ⊗ (𝑈 † 𝑃𝑖 𝑈 ),                             (S.6.43)
                                               2        2
                                                            𝑃 ∈{𝑋,𝑌,𝑍}

                                      ̃︁𝑖 := 1 𝐼 ⊗ 𝐼 + 1
                                                             ∑︁
                                      𝑊                                  ^ 𝑖,𝑃 ,
                                                                    𝑃𝑖 ⊗ 𝑂                                              (S.6.44)
                                             2         2
                                                         𝑃 ∈{𝑋,𝑌,𝑍}
                                                   (︁ )︁
                                      𝑊𝑖 := ProjU 𝑊  ̃︁𝑖 .                                                              (S.6.45)

We use the standard telescoping identity for products. For any sequences of matrices 𝐴1 , . . . , 𝐴𝑛 and 𝐵1 , . . . , 𝐵𝑛 :
                                                  ⎛          ⎞            (︃𝑗−1 )︃
                              𝑛
                             ∏︁      ∏︁𝑛        𝑛
                                               ∑︁    ∏︁𝑛                    ∏︁
                                𝐴𝑖 −     𝐵𝑖 =     ⎝       𝐴𝑖 ⎠ (𝐴𝑗 − 𝐵𝑗 )      𝐵𝑖 .                            (S.6.46)
                               𝑖=1      𝑖=1         𝑗=1   𝑖=𝑗+1                          𝑖=1

Applying this with 𝐴𝑖 = 𝑊𝑖 and 𝐵𝑖 = 𝑉𝑖 :
                        ⃦               ⃦              ⃦⎛        ⎞           (︃𝑗−1 )︃⃦
                          𝑛
                        ⃦∏︁       𝑛
                                 ∏︁     ⃦           𝑛 ⃦
                                                   ∑︁      𝑛                          ⃦
                                                       ⃦ ∏︁                    ∏︁
                                                                                                                        (S.6.47)
                                                                                      ⃦
                        ⃦ 𝑊𝑖 −      𝑉𝑖 ⃦         ≤             𝑊𝑖 (𝑊𝑗 − 𝑉𝑗 )       𝑉𝑖 ⃦
                        ⃦               ⃦              ⃦⎝        ⎠
                        ⃦               ⃦              ⃦                              ⃦
                            𝑖=1       𝑖=1      ∞   𝑗=1 ⃦ 𝑖=𝑗+1                 𝑖=1    ⃦
                                                                                                     ∞
                                                                                                                       33
                                                        ⃦         ⃦                        ⃦𝑗−1 ⃦
                                                     𝑛 ⃦ ∏︁
                                                        ⃦ 𝑛
                                                                  ⃦                        ⃦ ∏︁ ⃦
                                                    ∑︁
                                                                                                                 (S.6.48)
                                                                  ⃦
                                                  ≤            𝑊               ‖𝑊𝑗 − 𝑉𝑗 ‖∞ ⃦   𝑉𝑖 ⃦          .
                                                                                           ⃦      ⃦
                                                                 𝑖⃦
                                                        ⃦         ⃦
                                                        ⃦                                  ⃦      ⃦
                                                    𝑗=1 ⃦𝑖=𝑗+1    ⃦                               𝑖=1    ∞
                                                                           ∞

Since all 𝑊𝑖 and 𝑉𝑖 are unitary (the 𝑉𝑖 by construction and the 𝑊𝑖 after projection), each product has operator
norm 1. Therefore:
                                     ⃦ 𝑛         𝑛
                                                      ⃦    𝑛
                                     ⃦∏︁        ∏︁    ⃦   ∑︁
                                         𝑊    −    𝑉    ≤     ‖𝑊𝑗 − 𝑉𝑗 ‖∞ .                             (S.6.49)
                                     ⃦                ⃦
                                     ⃦      𝑖        𝑖⃦
                                     ⃦                ⃦
                                          𝑖=1           𝑖=1        ∞    𝑗=1

Since 𝑆 is unitary:
                                                                             𝑛
                                                                            ∑︁
                                        Heis
                                      ‖𝑈sew   𝛼 * ) − 𝑈 † ⊗ 𝑈 ‖∞ ≤
                                             (⃗                                   ‖𝑊𝑖 − 𝑉𝑖 ‖∞ .                  (S.6.50)
                                                                            𝑖=1

We bound each term ‖𝑊𝑖 − 𝑉𝑖 ‖∞ using the triangle inequality:

                                      ‖𝑊𝑖 − 𝑉𝑖 ‖∞ ≤ ‖𝑊𝑖 − 𝑊
                                                          ̃︁𝑖 ‖∞ + ‖𝑊
                                                                    ̃︁𝑖 − 𝑉𝑖 ‖∞ .                                (S.6.51)

                                      ̃︁𝑖 ) is the closest unitary to 𝑊
For the first term, since 𝑊𝑖 = ProjU (𝑊                               ̃︁𝑖 and 𝑉𝑖 is unitary:

                                 ‖𝑊𝑖 − 𝑊
                                       ̃︁𝑖 ‖∞ =          min        ̃︁𝑖 − 𝐵‖∞ ≤ ‖𝑊
                                                                   ‖𝑊            ̃︁𝑖 − 𝑉𝑖 ‖∞ .                   (S.6.52)
                                                     𝐵:unitary

Therefore:

                                                ‖𝑊𝑖 − 𝑉𝑖 ‖∞ ≤ 2‖𝑊
                                                                ̃︁𝑖 − 𝑉𝑖 ‖∞ .                                    (S.6.53)

For the approximation error:
                                               ⃦                                     ⃦
                                               ⃦                                     ⃦
                                             1                ∑︁
                                                                     ^        †
                                                                                                                 (S.6.54)
                                               ⃦                                     ⃦
                                ‖𝑊𝑖 − 𝑉𝑖 ‖∞ = ⃦
                                 ̃︁                            𝑃𝑖 ⊗ (𝑂𝑖,𝑃 − 𝑈 𝑃𝑖 𝑈 )⃦
                                             2⃦                                      ⃦
                                               ⃦    𝑃 ∈{𝑋,𝑌,𝑍}                       ⃦
                                                                                      ∞
                                                  1   ∑︁
                                                ≤            ‖𝑃𝑖 ⊗ (𝑂^ 𝑖,𝑃 − 𝑈 𝑃𝑖 𝑈 )‖∞
                                                                              †
                                                                                                                 (S.6.55)
                                                  2
                                                        𝑃 ∈{𝑋,𝑌,𝑍}
                                                    1         ∑︁                                  𝜀𝑖
                                                =                       ^ 𝑖,𝑃 − 𝑈 † 𝑃𝑖 𝑈 ‖∞ ≤
                                                                       ‖𝑂                            .           (S.6.56)
                                                    2                                             2
                                                        𝑃 ∈{𝑋,𝑌,𝑍}

Combining all bounds:
                                                                           𝑛            𝑛
                                                                          ∑︁      𝜀𝑖   ∑︁
                                      Heis
                                    ‖𝑈sew   𝛼 * ) − 𝑈 † ⊗ 𝑈 ‖∞ ≤
                                           (⃗                                  2·    =     𝜀𝑖 ,                  (S.6.57)
                                                                           𝑖=1
                                                                                  2    𝑖=1

which concludes the proof.
Proof of Lemma 1. We analyze the algorithm described in the lemma statement. For constant-depth circuits, each
Heisenberg-evolved Pauli observable 𝑈 † 𝑃𝑖 𝑈 has support on at most 𝑘 = 𝒪(1) qubits due to the limited lightcone
of the constant-depth circuit. We can express each Heisenberg-evolved Pauli observable in the Pauli basis as:
                                                         ∑︁
                                        𝑈 † 𝑃𝑖 𝑈 =                  𝛼𝑄 𝑄                                  (S.6.58)
                                                         𝑄∈{𝐼,𝑋,𝑌,𝑍}⊗𝑛 :|𝑄|≤𝑘

where |𝑄| denotes the weight of the Pauli operator 𝑄 (number of qubits that 𝑄 acts nontrivially on), and 𝛼𝑄 are
real coefficients.
  First, we show that the estimated Pauli coefficients 𝛼   ^ 𝑄 are unbiased estimators of the true Pauli coefficients 𝛼𝑄 .
For each sample in the dataset 𝒯𝑈 (𝑁 ), the random value 3 ⟨𝜑ℓ,𝑖 | 𝑃 |𝜑ℓ,𝑖 ⟩ serves as an unbiased estimator of
⟨𝜓ℓ | 𝑈 † 𝑃𝑖 𝑈 |𝜓ℓ ⟩. This follows from the properties of the randomized measurements (45 , 63 , 66 , 76 , 77 ). When
the 𝑖-th qubit of 𝑈 |𝜓ℓ ⟩ is measured in basis 𝐵 (chosen uniformly from {𝑋, 𝑌, 𝑍}), we get the following identity:
                                                                   1
                                  E[3 ⟨𝜑ℓ,𝑖 | 𝑃 |𝜑ℓ,𝑖 ⟩] = 3 ·       · E[⟨𝜑ℓ,𝑖 | 𝑃 |𝜑ℓ,𝑖 ⟩ | 𝐵 = 𝑃 ]             (S.6.59)
                                                                   3
                                                                                                                        34

                                                       = ⟨𝜓ℓ | 𝑈 † 𝑃𝑖 𝑈 |𝜓ℓ ⟩                                     (S.6.60)

Next, we observe that for a Pauli operator 𝑄, the coefficient in the Pauli decomposition is:

                                       𝛼𝑄 = E|𝜓⟩ [⟨𝜓| 𝑈 † 𝑃𝑖 𝑈 |𝜓⟩ · ⟨𝜓| 𝑄 |𝜓⟩ · 3|𝑄| ]                           (S.6.61)
                                                                        2
where the factor 3|𝑄| accounts for the fact that E[⟨𝜓| 𝑄 |𝜓⟩ ] = 3−|𝑄| when |𝜓⟩ is a random stabilizer state. Our
estimator:
                                                       𝑁
                                               3|𝑄| ∑︁
                                        𝛼
                                        ^𝑄 =           3 ⟨𝜑ℓ,𝑖 | 𝑃 |𝜑ℓ,𝑖 ⟩ · ⟨𝜓ℓ | 𝑄 |𝜓ℓ ⟩                        (S.6.62)
                                                𝑁
                                                    ℓ=1

is therefore an unbiased estimator of 𝛼𝑄 . By Hoeffding’s inequality and the fact that each term in the sum above
is bounded (since | ⟨𝜑ℓ,𝑖 | 𝑃 |𝜑ℓ,𝑖 ⟩ | ≤ 1 and | ⟨𝜓ℓ | 𝑄 |𝜓ℓ ⟩ | ≤ 1), with 𝑁 = 𝒪(22𝑘 log(3𝑛/𝛿)/𝜀2 ) samples, we have:
                                              [︂                             ]︂
                                                                        𝜀           𝛿
                                            Pr |^𝛼𝑄 − 𝛼 𝑄 | ≥           √       ≤                                  (S.6.63)
                                                                  3 · (2 2)𝑘      3𝑛 · 4𝑘

Since there are at most 𝒪(𝑛𝑘 ) Pauli operators with weight at most 𝑘, by the union bound, with probability at least
1 − 𝛿/3𝑛:
                                                             𝜀
                                        ^ 𝑄 − 𝛼𝑄 | ≤
                                       |𝛼                    √               ∀𝑄, s.t. |𝑄| ≤ 𝑘                     (S.6.64)
                                                       3 · (2 2)𝑘
  Now we analyze the effect of the thresholding step. For any Pauli operator 𝑄 with 𝛼𝑄 = 0 (i.e., not in the
support of 𝑈 † 𝑃𝑖 𝑈 ), we have with high probability:
                                                             𝜀             𝜀
                                              𝛼𝑄 | ≤
                                             |^              √     <       √                                      (S.6.65)
                                                       3 · (2 2) 𝑘   2 · (2 2)𝑘

Therefore, after thresholding, 𝛽^𝑄 = 0 for all 𝑄 not in the support of 𝑈 † 𝑃𝑖 𝑈 . This ensures that supp(𝑂
                                                                                                         ^ 𝑖,𝑃 ) ⊆
                                                                     ^
supp(𝑈 𝑃𝑖 𝑈 ). For our constructed approximation 𝑂𝑖,𝑃 = 𝑄:|𝑄|≤𝑘 𝛽𝑄 𝑄, we can bound the spectral norm of the
       †                                           ^      ∑︀
error:
                                                       ⃦                      ⃦
                                                       ⃦ ∑︁                   ⃦
                                    ^       †                    ^                                       (S.6.66)
                                                       ⃦                      ⃦
                                   ‖𝑂𝑖,𝑃 − 𝑈 𝑃𝑖 𝑈 ‖∞ = ⃦
                                                       ⃦        (𝛽𝑄 − 𝛼𝑄 )𝑄⃦  ⃦
                                                       ⃦𝑄:|𝑄|≤𝑘               ⃦
                                                                               ∞
                                                       √︃ ∑︁
                                                     ≤           |𝛽^𝑄 − 𝛼𝑄 |2                            (S.6.67)
                                                                       𝑄:|𝑄|≤𝑘

For each Pauli operator 𝑄, we have:
                                                                              𝜀            𝜀        𝜀
                      |𝛽^𝑄 − 𝛼𝑄 | ≤ |𝛽^𝑄 − 𝛼
                                           ^ 𝑄 | + |𝛼
                                                    ^ 𝑄 − 𝛼𝑄 | ≤              √    +       √    < √               (S.6.68)
                                                                        2 · (2 2)𝑘   3 · (2 2)𝑘  (2 2)𝑘

Since there are at most 4𝑘 Pauli operators in the sum, we get:
                                                    ⎯
                                                    ⎸ ∑︁ (︂                                )︂2
                                                                                  𝜀
                                ^ 𝑖,𝑃 − 𝑈 𝑃𝑖 𝑈 ‖∞ ≤ ⎷
                                         †
                                                                                                                  (S.6.69)
                                                    ⎸
                              ‖𝑂                                                 √
                                                                𝑄:|𝑄|≤𝑘
                                                                               (2 2)𝑘
                                                           √︃          (︂            )︂2
                                                                               𝜀
                                                       ≤        4𝑘 ·          √                                   (S.6.70)
                                                                            (2 2)𝑘
                                                           √
                                                        𝜀 · 4𝑘    𝜀 · 2𝑘   𝜀
                                                       = √      = 𝑘 𝑘/2 = 𝑘/2 ≤ 𝜀                                 (S.6.71)
                                                        (2 2) 𝑘  2 ·2    2

By the union bound over all 3𝑛 Pauli observables, with probability at least 1 − 𝛿:
                               ^ 𝑖,𝑃 − 𝑈 † 𝑃𝑖 𝑈 ‖∞ ≤ 𝜀
                              ‖𝑂                           and supp(𝑂
                                                                    ^ 𝑖,𝑃 ) ⊆ supp(𝑈 † 𝑃𝑖 𝑈 )                     (S.6.72)

for all 𝑖 ∈ {1, . . . , 𝑛} and 𝑃 ∈ {𝑋, 𝑌, 𝑍}. The runtime is 𝒪(𝑛𝑘 · 𝑁 ) = 𝒪(𝑛𝑘+1 log(𝑛/𝛿)/𝜀2 ), which is polynomial in
the system size 𝑛 since 𝑘 = 𝒪(1).
                                                                                                                     35

                                            G.    Optimization landscape

                        G.1.   Standard landscape has exponentially many local minima

  In this section, we analyze the optimization landscape of the standard parameterization for learning/training
shallow quantum circuits. We demonstrate that even simple shallow quantum circuits exhibit exponentially many
local minima that can trap optimization algorithms and prevent them from reaching the global optimum.


                                              G.1.a.    Problem formulation

  Consider a one-dimensional parameterized shallow quantum circuit with three layers of parameterized SWAP
operations defined as follows:
                               ∏︁                      ∏︁                    ∏︁
                        ⃗ :=
                     𝑈 (𝜃)        𝑒𝑖𝜃1,𝑗 SWAP2𝑗+1,2𝑗+2    𝑒𝑖𝜃2,𝑗 SWAP2𝑗,2𝑗+1    𝑒𝑖𝜃3,𝑗 SWAP2𝑗+1,2𝑗+2 , (S.1.1)
                                𝑗                        𝑗                    𝑗

where 𝜃⃗ = (𝜃1,𝑗 , 𝜃2,𝑗 , 𝜃3,𝑗 ) is a vector of real-valued parameters.
  Our goal is to train this parameterized shallow quantum circuit to generate a target unitary 𝑈𝑆 composed of
SWAP operations between specific qubit pairs:
                                                           ∏︁
                                                     𝑈𝑆 =     SWAP4𝑗+1,4𝑗+4 ,                         (S.1.2)
                                                       𝑗∈𝑆

where 𝑆 ⊆ {0, 1, 2, . . . , ⌊𝑛/4⌋ − 1} is a subset of block indices with |𝑆| = Θ(𝑛). For any such subset 𝑆, there exists
a parameter configuration 𝜃⃗ such that 𝑈𝑆 = 𝑈 (𝜃).   ⃗ This is stated formally in the following proposition.
Proposition 2 (Implementation of target unitary 𝑈𝑆 ). Let 𝑆 ⊆ {0, 1, 2, . . . , ⌊𝑛/4⌋ − 1} be any subset of block
indices, and define the target unitary
                                              ∏︁
                                        𝑈𝑆 =     SWAP4𝑗+1,4𝑗+4 .                                          (S.1.3)
                                                       𝑗∈𝑆

Consider the parameterized quantum circuit
                            ∏︁                      ∏︁                    ∏︁
                       ⃗ :=
                    𝑈 (𝜃)      𝑒𝑖𝜃1,𝑗 SWAP2𝑗+1,2𝑗+2    𝑒𝑖𝜃2,𝑗 SWAP2𝑗,2𝑗+1    𝑒𝑖𝜃3,𝑗 SWAP2𝑗+1,2𝑗+2 ,              (S.1.4)
                                𝑗                        𝑗                    𝑗

Then there exists a parameter configuration 𝜃⃗* such that 𝑈𝑆 = 𝑈 (𝜃⃗* ).
Proof. We prove this by constructing an explicit parameter configuration 𝜃⃗* that implements 𝑈𝑆 .
  First, observe that to implement a SWAP operation between non-adjacent qubits 4𝑗 + 1 and 4𝑗 + 4 in block 𝑗,
we need to compose a sequence of SWAP operations between adjacent qubits. Specifically, we use the following
identity:
                        SWAP4𝑗+1,4𝑗+4 = SWAP4𝑗+1,4𝑗+2 · SWAP4𝑗+3,4𝑗+4 · SWAP4𝑗+2,4𝑗+3                            (S.1.5)
                                      · SWAP4𝑗+1,4𝑗+2 · SWAP4𝑗+3,4𝑗+4 .                                          (S.1.6)
                                                                   ⃗ we set the following parameters for each
Now, to implement this sequence using our parameterized circuit 𝑈 (𝜃),
block 𝑗 ∈ 𝑆:
                           *
                          𝜃1,2𝑗+1 = 𝜋/2 (implements SWAP4𝑗+1,4𝑗+2 in the first layer)                            (S.1.7)
                           *
                          𝜃1,2𝑗+2 = 𝜋/2    (implements SWAP4𝑗+3,4𝑗+4 in the first layer)                         (S.1.8)
                           *
                          𝜃2,2𝑗+1 = 𝜋/2    (implements SWAP4𝑗+2,4𝑗+3 in the second layer)                        (S.1.9)
                           *
                          𝜃3,2𝑗+1 = 𝜋/2    (implements SWAP4𝑗+1,4𝑗+2 in the third layer)                       (S.1.10)
                           *
                          𝜃3,2𝑗+2 = 𝜋/2    (implements SWAP4𝑗+3,4𝑗+4 in the third layer)                       (S.1.11)
For all other parameters, we set 𝜃𝑘,𝑗
                                   *
                                      = 0, which results in identity operations. To verify that this parameter
configuration implements 𝑈𝑆 , we analyze its action on each block of 4 qubits:
   • For blocks 𝑗 ∈ 𝑆: The combination of 5 SWAP operations implements SWAP4𝑗+1,4𝑗+4 .
   • For blocks 𝑗 ∈/ 𝑆: All parameters are zero, implementing identity operations on these blocks.
Thus, the overall effect of 𝑈 (𝜃⃗* ) is precisely to apply SWAP4𝑗+1,4𝑗+4 for each 𝑗 ∈ 𝑆 and the identity operation for
       / 𝑆, which is exactly the definition of 𝑈𝑆 .
each 𝑗 ∈
                                                                                                                          36

                                                   G.1.b.   Local cost function

   To measure how well our parameterized circuit approximates the target, we need a suitable cost function. How-
ever, generic quantum circuit optimization faces a well-known challenge called the “barren plateau problem” (42 ),
where the optimization landscape becomes exponentially flat as the system size increases, making gradient-based
optimization ineffective. While it is not a complete solution for general circuits, for shallow circuits one can
significantly mitigate the barren plateau problem (42 ) by using a local cost function (62 ):
                                                 𝑛 (︁         (︁                                   )︁)︁
                                                                        ⃗ † 𝑈𝑆 |𝜓⟩⟨𝜓|𝑈 † 𝑈 (𝜃)
                                                ∑︁
                          ⃗ :=
                      𝐶𝑆 (𝜃)           E                1 − tr ⟨𝜓𝑖 | 𝑈 (𝜃)                  ⃗ |𝜓𝑖 ⟩ ≥ 0.            (S.1.12)
                                                                                      𝑆
                                 |𝜓⟩= 𝑛
                                     ⨂︀
                                        𝑖=1 |𝜓𝑖 ⟩ 𝑖=1
                                    ∈stab⊗𝑛
                                         1


Let us define all the notation used in this equation:
   • E|𝜓⟩ denotes an expectation value over random input states |𝜓⟩.
           ⨂︀𝑛
   • |𝜓⟩ = 𝑖=1 |𝜓𝑖 ⟩ is a product state, where each qubit 𝑖 is in an independent state |𝜓𝑖 ⟩.
   • stab⊗𝑛1    represents the set of all 𝑛-qubit product states where each single-qubit state |𝜓𝑖 ⟩ is a stabilizer state.
     These are states that can be efficiently described classically, specifically the eigenstates of Pauli operators
     |0⟩ , |1⟩ , |+⟩ , |−⟩ , |𝑦+⟩ , |𝑦−⟩.
This cost function has a natural interpretation:
   • We randomly sample product states |𝜓⟩ where each qubit is in one of six possible stabilizer states: |0⟩, |1⟩,
     |+⟩, |−⟩, |𝑦+⟩, or |𝑦−⟩.
        ⃗ † 𝑈𝑆 |𝜓⟩⟨𝜓|𝑈 † 𝑈 (𝜃)
   • 𝑈 (𝜃)                   ⃗ corresponds to evolving the input state |𝜓⟩⟨𝜓| under the target unitary 𝑈𝑆 followed by
                        𝑆
     the inverse of the parameterized circuit 𝑈 (𝜃).   ⃗
                   (︁                                   )︁
   • The term tr ⟨𝜓𝑖 | 𝑈 (𝜃) ⃗ † 𝑈𝑆 |𝜓⟩⟨𝜓|𝑈 † 𝑈 (𝜃)
                                                 ⃗ |𝜓𝑖 ⟩ represents the probability that qubit 𝑖 returns to its initial state
                                           𝑆
                    ⃗ † 𝑈𝑆 . When 𝑈 (𝜃)
     |𝜓𝑖 ⟩ after 𝑈 (𝜃)                  ⃗ = 𝑈𝑆 , this probability is 1.

   • We subtract this probability from 1 to get an error measure, sum over all qubits, and average over random
     input states.
This cost function has two important properties:
   1. Faithfulness: When the local cost function 𝐶𝑆 (𝜃)                                      ⃗ closely approximates
                                                        ⃗ ≈ 0, our parameterized circuit 𝑈 (𝜃)
                                              ⃗
      the target 𝑈𝑆 . Conversely, when 𝑈 (𝜃) is 𝜀-close to 𝑈𝑆 in the average-case distance, the cost will be at most
      𝒪(𝑛𝜀). See (62 , 78 , 79 ) for details.
   2. No barren plateaus: Because we’re measuring local quantities (individual qubit properties) rather than
                                                                               ⃗ is shallow, the optimization landscape
       global properties of the entire system and the parameterized circuit 𝑈 (𝜃)
       doesn’t flatten exponentially with system size. This makes gradient-based optimization feasible. See (62 ) for
       details.
The minimum value of this cost function is 0, which occurs exactly when 𝑈 (𝜃)     ⃗ = 𝑈𝑆 (up to global phase factors).
Higher values indicate greater differences between the parameterized circuit and the target unitary. While the local
cost function avoids the barren plateau problem (62 ), we will show that the optimization landscape still contains
significant challenges.


                                   G.1.c.    Exponentially many suboptimal local minima

   The following theorem reveals a fundamental limitation in quantum circuit optimization: even when using cost
functions and circuits that avoid barren plateaus, the optimization landscape contains an exponential number of
suboptimal local minima that can trap optimization algorithms.
Theorem 9 (Exponentially many strictly suboptimal local minima). Consider a subset 𝑆 ⊆ {0, 1, 2, . . . , ⌊𝑛/4⌋ − 1}
                                           ⃗ defined earlier, there exist exponentially many parameter configura-
with |𝑆| = Θ(𝑛). For the cost function 𝐶𝑆 (𝜃)
             |𝑆|
tions {𝜃⃗𝑥 }𝑥=0 that are:
            2    −2


                         1. Strictly suboptimal:                                 ⃗
                                                         𝐶𝑆 (𝜃⃗𝑥 ) ≥ 1 + min 𝐶𝑆 (𝜃),                                (S.1.13)
                                                                         ⃗
                                                                         𝜃
                                                                                                                              37
                                                                                   ⃦         ⃦
                             2. Local minima:                           ⃗ ∀𝜃⃗ with ⃦
                                                        𝐶𝑆 (𝜃⃗𝑥 ) ≤ 𝐶𝑆 (𝜃),        ⃦𝜃⃗ − 𝜃⃗𝑥 ⃦         < 𝜋/4,           (S.1.14)
                                                                                             ⃦
                                                                                                   ∞

for all 𝑥 = 0, 1, . . . , 2|𝑆| − 2.
   Each local minimum 𝜃⃗𝑥 in the theorem statement corresponds to a circuit that correctly implements the target
SWAP operations for blocks 𝑗 where 𝑏id(𝑗) (𝑥) = 1. The binary representation of 𝑥 directly encodes which blocks
are correctly optimized. The optimization landscape contains exponentially many suboptimal local minima, each
is a local minimum of an exponentially large region with a volume of (𝜋/2)3⌊𝑛/4⌋ . As the optimization landscape
is filled with exponentially many traps each with a large basin of attraction, an optimization algorithm that starts
from any such region will get trapped by the suboptimal local minima.
   As we show numerically in the main text experimental demonstrations as well as Appendix E, as the system
size 𝑛 increases, the probability of being trapped by a suboptimal local minimum increases rapidly to one, and the
probability of being able to navigate to the global minimum decreases exponentially with system size 𝑛.


                                                        G.1.d.     Proof of Theorem 9

   For simplicity, assume 𝑛 is divisible by 4 (if not, we can neglect the last 𝑛 mod 4 qubits). We group the parameters
𝜃⃗ as follows:

                         𝜃⃗𝐵,𝑗 := (𝜃1,2𝑗+1 , 𝜃1,2𝑗+2 , 𝜃2,2𝑗+1 , 𝜃3,2𝑗+1 , 𝜃3,2𝑗+2 ),   ∀𝑗 = 0, . . . , (𝑛/4) − 1,      (S.1.15)
                          𝜃𝐿,𝑗 := 𝜃2,2𝑗+2 , ∀𝑗 = 0, . . . , (𝑛/4) − 2.                                                  (S.1.16)

Here, 𝜃⃗𝐵,𝑗 represents the parameters for gates acting on 4 consecutive qubits (qubits 4𝑗 + 1 through 4𝑗 + 4), while
𝜃𝐿,𝑗 represents the parameter for a gate linking adjacent blocks.
  Each integer 𝑥 ∈ {0, . . . , 2|𝑆| − 1} corresponds to a specific parameter configuration 𝜃⃗𝑥 . Let 𝑏0 (𝑥), . . . , 𝑏|𝑆|−1 (𝑥)
be the binary representation of 𝑥 using |𝑆| bits. We sort the elements of set 𝑆 in ascending order and define a
mapping id from 𝑗 ∈ 𝑆 to its index in the sorted set (ranging from 0 to |𝑆| − 1). For each configuration 𝜃⃗𝑥 , we set:
                                       {︃
                                         (𝜋/2, 𝜋/2, 𝜋/2, 𝜋/2, 𝜋/2) if 𝑗 ∈ 𝑆 and 𝑏id(𝑗) (𝑥) = 1
                            𝜃⃗𝑥,𝐵,𝑗 :=                                                                                (S.1.17)
                                         (0, 0, 0, 0, 0)            otherwise

And for all linking parameters: 𝜃𝑥,𝐿,𝑗 := 0 for all 𝑗 = 0, . . . , (𝑛/4) − 2. By construction, these parameter configu-
rations yield the following cost values:

                       𝐶𝑆 (𝜃⃗𝑥 ) = 0,                                                          for 𝑥 = 2|𝑆| − 1,        (S.1.18)
                                             |𝑆|−1
                                              ∑︁
                       𝐶𝑆 (𝜃⃗𝑥 ) = |𝑆| −             𝑏𝑗 (𝑥) ≥ 1,                        for 𝑥 = 0, . . . , 2|𝑆| − 2.    (S.1.19)
                                              𝑗=0


Therefore, 𝜃⃗2|𝑆| −1 (where all bits equal 1) gives the global minimum with 𝐶𝑆 (𝜃⃗2|𝑆| −1 ) = 0, while all other configu-
rations 𝜃⃗𝑥 have 𝐶𝑆 (𝜃⃗𝑥 ) ≥ 1, establishing that they are strictly suboptimal.
  Now we⃦demonstrate⃦      that each 𝜃⃗𝑥 for 𝑥 = 0, . . . , 2|𝑆| − 2 is a local minimum. Consider any parameter vector 𝜃⃗
           ⃦⃗ ⃗ ⃦
such that ⃦𝜃 − 𝜃𝑥 ⃦ < 𝜋/4. For each block 𝑗 ∈ {0, . . . , (𝑛/4) − 1}, we label the qubits:
                     ∞

                                    𝑎 := 4𝑗 + 1,         𝑏 := 4𝑗 + 2,    𝑐 := 4𝑗 + 3,    𝑑 := 4𝑗 + 4.                   (S.1.20)

The block’s contribution to the cost function is:
                                           ∑︁ (︁         (︁                                      )︁)︁
               ⃗ :=
         𝐶𝑆,𝑗 (𝜃)            E                    1 − tr    ⟨𝜓𝑖 | 𝑈 ( ⃗ † 𝑈𝑆 |𝜓⟩⟨𝜓|𝑈 † 𝑈 (𝜃)
                                                                     𝜃)                   ⃗ |𝜓𝑖 ⟩ ≥ 0.                  (S.1.21)
                        ⨂︀      𝑛     ⊗𝑛
                                                                                    𝑆
                         |𝜓⟩=   𝑖=1 |𝜓𝑖 ⟩∈stab1     𝑖∈{𝑎,𝑏,𝑐,𝑑}


If 𝑗 ∈ / 𝑆 or if 𝑗 ∈ 𝑆 and 𝑏id(𝑗) (𝑥) = 1, then 𝐶𝑆,𝑗 (𝜃⃗𝑥 ) = 0 ≤ 𝐶𝑆,𝑗 (𝜃).           ⃗     The critical case is when 𝑗 ∈ 𝑆 and
𝑏id(𝑗) (𝑥) = 0, where 𝑈 (𝜃⃗𝑥 ) acts as identity on block 𝑗 while 𝑈𝑆 performs a SWAP between qubits 𝑎 and 𝑑. In this
case, 𝐶𝑆,𝑗 (𝜃⃗𝑥 ) = 1. For each qubit 𝑖, the fidelity term can be expressed as:
                                           (︁        (︁                                          )︁)︁
                                                                  ⃗              †     ⃗
                                    E         1 − tr    ⟨𝜓𝑖 | 𝑈 (𝜃) †
                                                                      𝑈𝑆 |𝜓⟩⟨𝜓|𝑈 𝑆 𝑈 ( 𝜃) |𝜓 𝑖 ⟩                         (S.1.22)
                                   ⨂︀   𝑛
                                |𝜓⟩=    𝑖=1 |𝜓𝑖 ⟩
                                                                                                                        38
                                     (︂            (︂ (︁        )︁† (︂ 𝐼    )︂ (︁          )︁† )︂)︂
                                 2           1             ⃗            𝑛−1          ⃗
                               =          1 − tr̸=𝑖 tr𝑖 𝑈 (𝜃)𝑈𝑆                        †
                                                                              tr𝑖 𝑈 (𝜃) 𝑈𝑆          .              (S.1.23)
                                 3           4                         2𝑛−1

Through analysis of tensor contractions, for qubit 𝑎:
                             (︂ (︁          )︁† (︂ 𝐼    )︂                    )︁† )︂
                      1               ⃗ 𝑆           𝑛−1
                                                                (︁
                                                                       ⃗                             1
                        tr̸=𝑎 tr𝑎 𝑈 (𝜃)𝑈                   tr 𝑎    𝑈 ( 𝜃)†
                                                                           𝑈𝑆        = 𝜆𝑎 + (1 − 𝜆𝑎 ) ,            (S.1.24)
                      4                            2𝑛−1                                              4

where 𝜆𝑎 := sin(𝜃𝐵,𝑗,2 )2 sin(𝜃𝐵,𝑗,3 )2 sin(𝜃𝐵,𝑗,4 )2 . Similarly for qubit 𝑑:
                                (︂ (︁            )︁† (︂ 𝐼    )︂              )︁† )︂
                         1                 ⃗             𝑛−1
                                                                   (︁
                                                                       ⃗                            1
                           tr̸=𝑑 tr𝑑 𝑈 (𝜃)𝑈𝑆                             †
                                                                tr𝑑 𝑈 (𝜃) 𝑈𝑆        = 𝜆𝑑 + (1 − 𝜆𝑑 ) ,             (S.1.25)
                         4                              2𝑛−1                                        4

where 𝜆𝑑 := sin(𝜃𝐵,𝑗,1 )2 sin(𝜃𝐵,𝑗,3 )2 sin(𝜃𝐵,𝑗,5 )2 . For qubits 𝑏 and 𝑐, after algebraic manipulations:
                                            (︂ (︁           )︁† (︂ 𝐼    )︂              )︁† )︂
                                    1                   ⃗           𝑛−1
                                                                              (︁
                                                                                  ⃗
                                       tr̸=𝑏 tr𝑏 𝑈 (𝜃)𝑈𝑆                            †
                                                                           tr𝑏 𝑈 (𝜃) 𝑈𝑆                            (S.1.26)
                                    4                              2𝑛−1
                                             3
                                     ≤ 1 − sin(𝜃𝐵,𝑗,3 )2 cos(𝜃𝐵,𝑗,1 )2 cos(𝜃𝐵,𝑗,4 )2                               (S.1.27)
                                             4
And:
                                              (︂ (︁        )︁† (︂ 𝐼     )︂              )︁† )︂
                                       1              ⃗             𝑛−1
                                                                              (︁
                                                                                  ⃗
                                         tr̸=𝑐 tr𝑐 𝑈 (𝜃)𝑈𝑆                          †
                                                                           tr𝑐 𝑈 (𝜃) 𝑈𝑆                            (S.1.28)
                                       4                          2𝑛−1
                                               3
                                       ≤ 1 − sin(𝜃𝐵,𝑗,3 )2 cos(𝜃𝐵,𝑗,2 )2 cos(𝜃𝐵,𝑗,5 )2                             (S.1.29)
                                               4
Combining these bounds:

               ⃗ ≥1−    1                                             1
         𝐶𝑆,𝑗 (𝜃)          sin(𝜃𝐵,𝑗,2 )2 sin(𝜃𝐵,𝑗,3 )2 sin(𝜃𝐵,𝑗,4 )2 − sin(𝜃𝐵,𝑗,1 )2 sin(𝜃𝐵,𝑗,3 )2 sin(𝜃𝐵,𝑗,5 )2   (S.1.30)
                        2                                             2
                        1                                              1
                    + sin(𝜃𝐵,𝑗,3 ) cos(𝜃𝐵,𝑗,1 ) cos(𝜃𝐵,𝑗,4 ) + sin(𝜃𝐵,𝑗,3 )2 cos(𝜃𝐵,𝑗,2 )2 cos(𝜃𝐵,𝑗,5 )2
                                       2             2              2
                                                                                                                   (S.1.31)
                        2                                              2
               ⃦         ⃦
The constraint ⃦𝜃⃗ − 𝜃⃗𝑥 ⃦ < 𝜋/4 implies:
               ⃦         ⃦
                           ∞

                                               | sin(𝜃𝐵,𝑗,𝑘 )| < 0.5,   ∀𝑘 = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,                        (S.1.32)
                                               | cos(𝜃𝐵,𝑗,𝑘 )| > 0.5,   ∀𝑘 = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.                        (S.1.33)

                 ⃗ ≥ 1 = 𝐶𝑆,𝑗 (𝜃⃗𝑥 ).
Therefore, 𝐶𝑆,𝑗 (𝜃)
                                       ⃗ = ∑︀(𝑛/4)−1 𝐶𝑆,𝑗 (𝜃),
  Since the total cost function is 𝐶𝑆 (𝜃)                                                             ⃗ for all 𝜃⃗
                                                           ⃗ we have established that 𝐶𝑆 (𝜃⃗𝑥 ) ≤ 𝐶𝑆 (𝜃)
     ⃦       ⃦                                𝑗=0
with ⃦𝜃 − 𝜃𝑥 ⃦ < 𝜋/4, proving that 𝜃⃗𝑥 is indeed a local minimum.
     ⃦⃗ ⃗ ⃦
               ∞



                                                  G.2.    Our landscape is benign

                               G.2.a.       All local minima are global in learning Pauli coefficients

                                                                                  𝛼) used in Algorithm 1. We show
   In this section, we analyze the optimization landscape for the loss function ℒ(⃗
that this loss function is strongly convex, ensuring that all local minima are global minima. This guarantees that
local optimization methods such as gradient descent will reliably converge to the optimal solution, providing a
rigorous justification for the empirical efficiency of our learning procedure.
   Recall from Section F.2 that for shallow quantum circuits with known architecture, we can precompute the
backward lightcones {𝐶𝑖 }𝑛𝑖=1 . The Pauli coefficient parameterization introduces parameters 𝛼𝑃𝑖 ,𝑄 for:
    • Each qubit 𝑖 ∈ {1, . . . , 𝑛},
    • Each single-qubit Pauli observable 𝑃 ∈ {𝑋, 𝑌, 𝑍},
    • Each multi-qubit Pauli 𝑄 ∈ Pauli(𝐶𝑖 ) supported on 𝐶𝑖 .
                                                                                                                                39

The total number of parameters is 3𝑛 · max𝑖 4|𝐶𝑖 | = 𝒪(𝑛) since |𝐶𝑖 | = 𝒪(1) for constant-depth circuits. Given the
randomized measurement dataset
                                        {︃          𝑛                    𝑛
                                                                                   }︃𝑁
                                                   ⨂︁                   ⨂︁
                             𝒯𝑈 (𝑁 ) = |𝜓ℓ ⟩ =        |𝜓ℓ,𝑖 ⟩ , |𝜑ℓ ⟩ =    |𝜑ℓ,𝑖 ⟩     ,                   (S.2.34)
                                                            𝑖=1                     𝑖=1          ℓ=1

                                           ⃗ is
the loss function for the parameter vector 𝛼
                             𝑁     𝑛                                                                                 ⃒2
                         1 ∑︁ ∑︁            ∑︁            ∑︁       ⃒
                ℒ(⃗
                  𝛼) =                                             ⃒𝛼𝑃𝑖 ,𝑄 − 3|𝑄|+1 ⟨𝜑ℓ,𝑖 | 𝑃 |𝜑ℓ,𝑖 ⟩ · ⟨𝜓ℓ | 𝑄 |𝜓ℓ ⟩⃒ .   (S.2.35)
                                                                   ⃒                                                 ⃒
                         𝑁    𝑖=1
                            ℓ=1         𝑃 ∈{𝑋,𝑌,𝑍} 𝑄∈Pauli(𝐶𝑖 )


                                                   𝛼) is strongly convex in the parameter space 𝛼
Theorem 10 (Strong convexity). The loss function ℒ(⃗                                            ⃗.
Proof. The loss function can be rewritten in matrix form as:

                                        𝑁
                                                        ⃦       𝑁
                                                                      ⃦2
                                     1 ∑︁               ⃦    1 ∑︁     ⃦
                              ℒ(⃗
                                𝛼) =       𝛼 − 𝑑⃗ℓ ‖2 = ⃦𝛼
                                          ‖⃗        2
                                                          ⃗−      𝑑⃗ℓ ⃦ + constant,                                        (S.2.36)
                                                        ⃦             ⃦
                                     𝑁                  ⃦    𝑁        ⃦
                                               ℓ=1                              ℓ=1       2

where 𝑑⃗ℓ is the vector of empirical estimates:

                                          (𝑑⃗ℓ )𝑃𝑖 ,𝑄 = 3|𝑄|+1 ⟨𝜑ℓ,𝑖 | 𝑃 |𝜑ℓ,𝑖 ⟩ · ⟨𝜓ℓ | 𝑄 |𝜓ℓ ⟩ .                         (S.2.37)

        𝛼) is a sum of squared ℓ2 norms, it is strongly convex with:
Since ℒ(⃗
                  𝛼) = 2𝐼 (where 𝐼 is the identity matrix)
   • Hessian ∇2 ℒ(⃗
   • Minimum eigenvalue 𝜆min = 2 > 0
             𝛼) is 2-strongly convex.
Therefore, ℒ(⃗
                                                                     𝛼) has a unique global minimum 𝛼
Corollary 1 (Global optimality of local minima). The loss function ℒ(⃗                              ⃗ * , and:
   1. Every local minimum is global.
   2. Every critical point satisfies 𝛼  ⃗ *.
                                     ⃗ =𝛼
Proof. These properties follow directly from strong convexity: strictly convex functions have a unique global mini-
mizer, and any stationary point must be this minimum.


                                 G.2.b.     Constant local minima in learning local inversions

  We now analyze the landscape for the non-convex optimization problem underlying Algorithms 2 and 3. Specifi-
cally, we show that although the objective is non-convex, it is defined over a compact manifold of constant dimension,
and the number of local minima remains constant. As a result, gradient descent with a constant number of random
restarts converges to a global minimum with high probability. This is formally stated below.
Theorem 11 (Benign Landscape). Let
                                                ∑︁
                                    𝑂^ 𝑖,𝑃 =           𝛼𝑃*
                                                           𝑖 ,𝑄
                                                                𝑄, 𝑃 ∈ {𝑋, 𝑌, 𝑍},                              (S.2.38)
                                                   𝑄∈Pauli(𝐶𝑖 )


be the learned Heisenberg observables supported on a constant-size lightcone 𝐶𝑖 with |𝐶𝑖 | = 𝑘 = 𝒪(1). Consider
the optimization problem:

                                                                    ‖𝑉𝑖† 𝑂
                                                            ∑︁
                           min 𝑓 (𝑉𝑖 ), where 𝑓 (𝑉𝑖 ) =                  ^ 𝑖,𝑃 𝑉𝑖 − 𝑃𝑖 ‖∞ .             (S.2.39)
                          𝑉𝑖 ∈SU(2𝑘 )
                                                                         𝑃 ∈{𝑋,𝑌,𝑍}


Then the landscape of 𝑓 over the compact manifold SU(2𝑘 ) exhibits the following properties:
 (a) The set of critical points of 𝑓 , which contains all local minima, consists of a finite number of connected
     components. This number is bounded by a constant that depends only on 𝑘.
                                                                                                                         40

  (b) The basin of attraction corresponding to the set of global minima occupies a non-zero fraction of the total
       volume of SU(2𝑘 ). Consequently, a gradient-based method with a constant number of random restarts finds
       a global minimum with arbitrarily high probability.

Proof. The objective function is 𝑓 (𝑉𝑖 ) = 𝑃 ∈{𝑋,𝑌,𝑍} ‖𝑉𝑖† 𝑂    ^ 𝑖,𝑃 𝑉𝑖 − 𝑃𝑖 ‖∞ . The domain of optimization is the special
                                             ∑︀

unitary group SU(2 ), which is a compact real-algebraic manifold. The function 𝑓 is a finite sum of terms, each
                       𝑘

being a composition of a smooth (real-analytic) unitary conjugation map 𝑉𝑖 ↦→ 𝑉𝑖† 𝑂          ^ 𝑖,𝑃 𝑉𝑖 and the spectral norm
‖ · ‖∞ . The spectral norm is a locally Lipschitz function. As a composition and finite sum of such functions, 𝑓 is
itself locally Lipschitz. Furthermore, both the function 𝑓 and the domain SU(2𝑘 ) are semi-algebraic. A function
is semi-algebraic if its graph can be described by a finite number of polynomial equations and inequalities. The
operators 𝑂  ^ 𝑖,𝑃 and 𝑃𝑖 are matrices with constant entries, and the operations of matrix multiplication, addition,
and conjugation are polynomial in the entries of 𝑉𝑖 . The spectral norm is the maximum of the absolute values of
eigenvalues, hence 𝑓 is semi-algebraic.
   For a locally Lipschitz function on a compact domain, local minima can only occur at Clarke critical points,
i.e., points 𝑉𝑖 where the Clarke subdifferential 𝜕𝑓 (𝑉𝑖 ) contains the zero vector. Clarke subdifferential 𝜕𝑓 (𝑉𝑖 ) is the
convex hull of all possible limit points of gradients from nearby points. A fundamental theorem of real algebraic
geometry states that the set of critical points of a semi-algebraic function on a compact semi-algebraic set has a
finite number of connected components (80 ). This number is bounded by a constant dependent only on the degree
of the polynomials defining the function and domain, which in this case depends only on 𝑘 = 𝒪(1). As the local
minima form a subset of the critical points, the set of local minima also consists of a finite number of connected
components. This proves the first statement.
   For the second statement, we consider the dynamics of gradient descent on SU(2𝑘 ). Since SU(2𝑘 ) is a compact
manifold, it possesses a finite, non-zero volume (Haar measure), which we denote Vol(SU(2𝑘 )). The basins of
attraction corresponding to the finite number of local minimal components partition the manifold. Let ℬ𝑔 be the
union of the basins of attraction for all global minima. As there are a finite number of basins partitioning a finite
volume, the basin for any given minimum must have a non-zero measure. Thus, Vol(ℬ𝑔 ) > 0. The probability 𝑝
that an initialization point drawn uniformly at random from SU(2𝑘 ) lies within the basin of a global minimum is
                                                Vol(ℬ )
therefore non-zero with probability 𝑝 = Vol(SU(2𝑔 𝑘 )) > 0. With 𝑅 independent random restarts, the probability of
failing to initialize in ℬ𝑔 in all attempts is (1 − 𝑝)𝑅 . Since 0 < 𝑝 ≤ 1, this failure probability can be made arbitrarily
small by choosing a constant 𝑅. Thus, gradient descent with a constant number of restarts converges to a global
minimum with high probability. This establishes the second statement.


                            H.   Generative quantum advantage for classical bitstrings

   In this section, we establish generative quantum advantage for sampling classical bitstrings. These results follow
relatively directly from our efficient algorithm for learning any shallow quantum circuits (see Appendix F and (45 ))
and standard techniques for establishing the classical computational hardness for sampling from constant-depth
quantum circuits (50 , 56 , 57 ). However, as we are explicitly using the mappings between shallow 𝐷-dimensional
quantum circuits and deep (𝐷 − 1)-dimensional quantum circuits considered in (50 , 56 , 57 ) in the experiments,
we will introduce this mapping in detail using the language of generative models.


                             H.1.   Problem formulation and universal approximation

  We begin by defining the task of learning to generate classical bitstrings.
Definition 13 (The task of learning to generate classical bitstrings). We are given a dataset of input-output
                                                           𝑖=1 . Each output bitstring 𝑦𝑖 is sampled according to an
bitstring pairs {(𝑥𝑖 , 𝑦𝑖 ) | 𝑥𝑖 ∈ {0, 1}𝑛 , 𝑦𝑖 ∈ {0, 1}𝑚 }𝑁
unknown conditional distribution 𝑝(𝑦𝑖 |𝑥𝑖 ). The goal is to learn a model from the dataset that can generate new
output bitstrings 𝑦 according to the unknown distribution 𝑝(𝑦|𝑥) for any given new input bitstring 𝑥.
  Next, we define generative quantum neural networks (QNN). These are trainable quantum machine learning
models that can be used to learn conditional probability distributions and generate new classical bitstrings from
any given input bitstrings. The parameters are given by a vector 𝜃.   ⃗
Definition 14 (Generative QNNs). A generative QNN over ℓ qubits performs the following operations:
   1. Encodes the input bitstring 𝑥 ∈ {0, 1}𝑛 into an ℓ-qubit input product state |𝜓𝑥 ⟩ and a local measurement
      basis ℳ𝑥 over 𝑚 ≤ ℓ qubits.
                                                                                             ⃗
   2. Evolves the input product state |𝜓𝑥 ⟩ under an ℓ-qubit parameterized quantum circuit 𝐶(𝜃).
                                                                                                                         41

                                                                ⃗ |𝜓𝑥 ⟩ in the basis ℳ𝑥 .
   3. Measures the first 𝑚 qubits of the ℓ-qubit output state 𝐶(𝜃)
                                                                                     ⃗ that depends on the input
The QNN generates an 𝑚-bit string 𝑦 ∈ {0, 1}𝑚 according to a distribution 𝑝QNN (𝑦|𝑥; 𝜃)
                                                          ⃗
bitstring 𝑥 ∈ {0, 1} and the trainable circuit parameters 𝜃.
                    𝑛

  Even when the measurement is generalized to a POVM conditioned on 𝑥, ℳ𝑥 forms a probability distribution
for 𝑝(𝑦|𝑥). The specific mapping between the outcome of the generalized measurement and the bitstring 𝑦 provides
                                                                              ⃗ we could absorb 𝐶(𝜃)𝑈
additional freedom in the mapping. We note that for any particular choice of 𝜃,                      ⃗ 𝑥 into a
                   ⃗ where 𝑈𝑥 |0⟩ = |𝜓𝑥 ⟩, but we choose to keep them conceptually separate here.
definition of ℳ𝑥 (𝜃),


                                          H.1.a.      Tomographically completeness

  Some generative QNNs are tomographically complete, meaning that by going through all exponential choices of
                                                                                     ⃗ one could obtain complete
input bitstring 𝑥 and looking at the conditional probability distribution 𝑝QNN (𝑦|𝑥; 𝜃),
                                                         ⃗
knowledge about the parameterized quantum circuit 𝐶(𝜃). This is formally stated as follows.
Definition 15 (Tomographically-complete generative QNNs). A generative QNN associated with |𝜓𝑥 ⟩ , ℳ𝑥 , 𝐶(𝜃)  ⃗
over ℓ qubits is tomographically-complete if the following are true.
   • The input bitstring 𝑥 ∈ {0, 1}𝑛 can be represented as blocks of bits,

                                       𝑥 = (𝑥(1,st) , . . . , 𝑥(ℓ,st) , . . . , 𝑥(1,mt) , . . . , 𝑥(ℓ,mt) ),        (S.1.1)

     where 𝑥(𝑖,st) specifies a single-qubit state |𝜓𝑥(𝑖,st) ⟩ on the 𝑖-th qubit and 𝑥(𝑖,mt) specifies a single-qubit two-
     outcome measurement ℳ𝑥(𝑖,mt) on the 𝑖-th qubit.
   • ∀𝑖 ∈ {1, . . . , ℓ}, the span of |𝜓𝑥(𝑖,st) ⟩⟨𝜓𝑥(𝑖,st) |, ∀𝑥(𝑖,st) is the space for single-qubit density matrices (2 × 2
                                        {︀                            }︀
     positive-semidefinite complex matrices with trace one).
   • ∀𝑖 ∈ {1, . . . , ℓ}, the 𝑖-th qubit measurement ℳ𝑥(𝑖,mt) , ∀𝑥(𝑖,mt) is tomographically complete.
                                                         {︀                   }︀

   • All ℓ qubits are measured to generate 𝑦 ∈ {0, 1}𝑚 , i.e., ℓ = 𝑚.
                                                                                                     ⃗
                                                            ⃗ encode full knowledge of the unitary 𝐶(𝜃).
These conditions imply that the generative model 𝑝QNN (𝑦|𝑥; 𝜃)


                                              H.1.b.     Universal approximation

  We establish that generative QNNs possess universal approximation capabilities for arbitrary conditional distri-
butions over classical bitstrings.
Proposition 3 (Universal approximation). For any number of bits 𝑛, 𝑚, any conditional distribution 𝑝(𝑦|𝑥) where
𝑥 ∈ {0, 1}𝑛 , 𝑦 ∈ {0, 1}𝑚 , and any approximation error 𝜖 > 0, there exists a generative QNN that can approximate
𝑝(𝑦|𝑥) up to 𝜖 error in total variation distance (TVD).
Proof. For any conditional distribution 𝑝(𝑦|𝑥) and any approximation error 𝜖 > 0, there exists a reversible classical
circuit 𝐶 taking as input the 𝑛-bit string 𝑥, 𝑟 random ancilla bits, and 𝑙 deterministic bits initialized at 0, such
that the distribution over the first 𝑚 output bits is 𝜖-close to the distribution 𝑝(𝑦|𝑥) in total variation distance.
This follows from standard circuit approximation results for probability distributions (81 –83 ).
   By setting ℓ = 𝑛 + 𝑟 + 𝑙, we can define a quantum circuit that implements exactly the same operations as the
reversible classical circuit 𝐶. The quantum circuit acts on an initial ℓ-qubit state |𝑥⟩ ⊗ |+𝑟 ⟩ ⊗ |0𝑙 ⟩ and measures
in the computational basis {|𝑏⟩ : 𝑏 ∈ {0, 1}𝑚 } after the computation. Such a quantum circuit forms a generative
QNN that approximates 𝑝(𝑦|𝑥) up to 𝜖 error in total variation distance.
  While this proposition establishes the theoretical expressivity of QNNs for approximating any conditional prob-
ability distributions, the circuit size required for a given approximation error 𝜖 can be substantial. In analogy to
the preparation of arbitrary quantum states, in the worst case, the number of gates scales exponentially in 𝑛 and
𝑚. However, for many practical distributions, the required circuit complexity is significantly lower. We will focus
here on cases here that permit efficient quantum training and inference.
                                                                                                                                           42

                                      H.2.      Instantaneously-deep quantum neural networks

   We now introduce a generative quantum model that we refer to as instantaneously-deep QNNs. These shallow
quantum neural networks effectively sample and simulate the behavior of much deeper quantum circuits for certain
generative tasks using a remarkable phenomenon unique to quantum computation. This phenomenon is well known
in quantum computing, e.g., it was exploited in measurement-based quantum computation (53 ) to achieve universal
quantum computation. It is also the central building block for proving that shallow quantum circuits are classically
hard to simulate (50 , 56 , 57 ). The formal statement of this phenomenon is given below. A schematic example for
the special case of 2D mapped to (1+1)D is given in Fig. S3 in Appendix C.2.a.
Definition 16 (Instantaneously-deep QNNs). Given any number of qubits 𝑛 and a connectivity graph 𝐺 over 𝑛
qubits, an instantaneously-deep QNN is a generative QNN with a circuit geometry defined by 𝐺. The QNN1 has
𝑛 real parameters 𝜃⃗ ∈ R𝑛 , takes an input bitstring 𝑥 ∈ {0, 1}𝑛 , and generates an output bitstring 𝑦 ∈ {0, 1}𝑛 . The
𝑖-th bit of the bitstring 𝑥 determines the input state for the 𝑖-th qubit chosen from {|0⟩ , |+⟩ = √12 (|0⟩ + |1⟩)}. We
use the mapping convention 0 ↦→ |+⟩ and 1 ↦→ |0⟩. The quantum circuit associated with the QNN consists of:
   1. Preparing the 𝑛-qubit product input state |𝜓𝑥 ⟩ according to bitstring 𝑥.
   2. Applying a layer of 𝑅𝑍 (𝜃𝑖 ) = 𝑒−𝑖𝜃𝑖 𝑍/2 rotation gates to all 𝑛 qubits, where {𝜃𝑖 }𝑛𝑖=1 are 𝑛 trainable parameters.
   3. Applying a layer of 𝐶𝑍 gates on all edges in the connectivity graph 𝐺.
   4. Measuring the 𝑛-qubit final state in the Pauli-𝑋 basis.
This quantum circuit is shallow with 𝒪(1) circuit depth regardless of the number of qubits.
   The following lemma shows that despite their constant depth, these shallow QNNs can effectively implement deep
random quantum circuits when arranged with an appropriate connectivity structure. This lemma uses exactly the
same mechanism as in measurement-based quantum computation (53 ).
Lemma 2 (Generating deep QNNs with shallow QNNs). For any dimension 𝐷 ≥ 2, consider a geometry 𝐺
consisting of qubits arranged in a 𝐷-dimensional lattice of size 𝑛 = 𝑛1 × 𝑛2 × . . . × 𝑛𝐷 . We label each qubit by
a 𝐷-dimensional coordinate (𝑖1 , . . . , 𝑖𝐷 ) with 1 ≤ 𝑖𝑗 ≤ 𝑛𝑗 , ∀1 ≤ 𝑗 ≤ 𝐷. The geometry 𝐺 is a standard Euclidean
lattice where some edges with the same 𝑖1 coordinate removed. This can be formally stated as follows:
                                                                                        ∑︀𝐷
    • Any edge in 𝐺 connects (𝑖1 , 𝑖2 , . . . , 𝑖𝐷 ) and (𝑖′1 , 𝑖′2 , . . . , 𝑖′𝐷 ) with 𝑗=1 |𝑖𝑗 − 𝑖′𝑗 | = 1.
                                                                           ∑︀𝐷
   • For all (𝑖1 , 𝑖2 , . . . , 𝑖𝐷 ) and (𝑖′1 , 𝑖′2 , . . . , 𝑖′𝐷 ) with    𝑗=1 |𝑖𝑗 − 𝑖𝑗 | = 1, there is always an edge in 𝐺 if 𝑖1 ̸= 𝑖1 , but
                                                                                       ′                                               ′

     may not have an edge in 𝐺 if 𝑖1 = 𝑖′1 .
The output distribution of the instantaneously-deep QNN associated with 𝐺 is equivalent to sampling and running a
deep random quantum circuit over a (𝐷−1)-dimensional lattice with depth 𝑛1 . Given an input bitstring 𝑥 ∈ {0, 1}𝑛 ,
the distribution over 𝑦 ∈ {0, 1}𝑛 can be generated as follows:
   1. Initialize an (𝑛2 · 𝑛3 · . . . · 𝑛𝐷 )-qubit state |𝜑⟩ to be the product state given by 𝑥 restricted to the coordinates
      (1, 𝑖2 , . . . , 𝑖𝐷 ), where the mapping is 0 ↦→ |+⟩ and 1 ↦→ |0⟩ for each qubit.
   2. Set 𝑖1 ← 1. This parameter indexes both the first coordinate of the shallow quantum circuit and the circuit
      layer of the corresponding deep quantum circuit.
   3. Apply a layer of 𝑅𝑍 rotations to qubits at positions (𝑖1 , 𝑖2 , . . . , 𝑖𝐷 ) with rotation angles 𝜃(𝑖1 ,𝑖2 ,...,𝑖𝐷 ) determined
      by the QNN, for all 𝑖2 , . . . , 𝑖𝐷 .
   4. Apply a layer of 𝐶𝑍 gates to |𝜓⟩ on edges between (𝑖1 , 𝑖2 , . . . , 𝑖𝐷 ) and (𝑖1 , 𝑖′2 , . . . , 𝑖′𝐷 ) in 𝐺 for all coordinates
      1 ≤ 𝑖2 , 𝑖′2 ≤ 𝑛2 , . . . , 1 ≤ 𝑖𝐷 , 𝑖′𝐷 ≤ 𝑛𝐷 .
   5. If 𝑖1 < 𝑛1 , generate the bits for 𝑦𝑖 with 𝑖 = (𝑖1 , 𝑖2 , . . . , 𝑖𝐷 ) for all 𝑖2 , . . . , 𝑖𝐷 through the following steps:
          • If 𝑥(𝑖1 +1,𝑖2 ,...,𝑖𝐷 ) = 0, apply an 𝐻 gate irrespective of 𝑦𝑖 , set 𝑦𝑖 to be a random bit, and apply a 𝑍 gate
            to the (𝑖2 , . . . , 𝑖𝐷 )-th qubit of |𝜑⟩ if 𝑦𝑖 = 1 (do nothing if 𝑦𝑖 = 0).
          • If 𝑥(𝑖1 +1,𝑖2 ,...,𝑖𝐷 ) = 1, measure the (𝑖2 , . . . , 𝑖𝐷 )-th qubit of |𝜑⟩ in the 𝑋 basis, set 𝑦𝑖 to be the measurement
            outcome, and reset the (𝑖2 , . . . , 𝑖𝐷 )-th qubit of |𝜑⟩ to |0⟩.



1 For simplicity, we assume a single parameter 𝑛. However, one could easily extend the definition to having different parameters.
                                                                                                                                         43

      Increment 𝑖1 by one and return to Step 3.
   6. If 𝑖1 = 𝑛1 , generate the random bits for 𝑦𝑖 with 𝑖 = (𝑛1 , 𝑖2 , . . . , 𝑖𝐷 ) for all 𝑖2 , . . . , 𝑖𝐷 by measuring all
      𝑛2 · 𝑛3 · . . . · 𝑛𝐷 qubits in the state |𝜑⟩ in the 𝑋 basis.
Proof. We show that the shallow QNN simulates a depth-𝑛1 circuit on a (𝐷 − 1)-dimensional lattice of size 𝑛2 ×
· · · × 𝑛𝐷 . The first dimension coordinate 𝑖1 in our shallow QNN effectively encodes the circuit depth, while the
remaining dimensions (𝑖2 , . . . , 𝑖𝐷 ) encode the spatial layout of qubits in the simulated deep circuit.
Mapping Between Shallow QNN and Deep QNN
Let us define the correspondence precisely:
    • Each “slice” of the 𝐷-dimensional lattice in the shallow QNN at a fixed coordinate 𝑖1 corresponds to one
      circuit layer of the deep QNN.
    • Qubits at positions (𝑖1 , 𝑖2 , . . . , 𝑖𝐷 ) in the shallow QNN correspond to qubits at positions (𝑖2 , . . . , 𝑖𝐷 ) in layer
      𝑖1 of the deep QNN.
    • Edges within a slice that connect vertices with the same 𝑖1 coordinate implement the entangling operations
      within that circuit layer of the deep QNN.
    • The quantum state flows from slice 𝑖1 to slice 𝑖1 +1 through a quantum teleportation mechanism (53 ) enabled
      by the 𝐶𝑍 gates across different slices.
We denote 𝒮𝐷−1 = {(𝑖2 , . . . , 𝑖𝐷 ) : 1 ≤ 𝑖𝑗 ≤ 𝑛𝑗 , 2 ≤ 𝑗 ≤ 𝐷} to be the set of all (𝐷 − 1)-dimensional coordinates in
our lattice. Each coordinate in 𝒮𝐷−1 corresponds to a qubit position in the deep QNN.
   Let |𝜑(𝑖1 ) ⟩ denote the state of the (𝐷 − 1)-dimensional system after processing layer 𝑖1 . We prove by induction
that this state correctly represents the state of the deep QNN after 𝑖1 layers. To process the shallow QNN layer by
layer, we use the fact that 𝐶𝑍 gates and 𝑅𝑍 gates commute. Hence, we can order them in the following way.
Base Case: Initialization and First Layer (𝑖1 = 1)
We initialize an (𝑛2 · . . . · 𝑛𝐷 )-qubit quantum register with states determined by the input bits 𝑥(1,𝑖2 ,...,𝑖𝐷 ) , mapping
0 ↦→ |+⟩ and 1 ↦→ |0⟩ for each qubit. This exactly matches the initialization of the corresponding deep QNN. After
initialization, we apply:
   1. 𝑅𝑍 (𝜃(1,𝑖2 ,...,𝑖𝐷 ) ) rotations to each qubit.
   2. 𝐶𝑍 gates between qubits at positions (1, 𝑖2 , . . . , 𝑖𝐷 ) and (1, 𝑖′2 , . . . , 𝑖′𝐷 ) where adjacent positions differ by
      exactly one coordinate.
These operations implement the first layer of entangling gates and single-qubit rotations in the deep QNN. Hence,
|𝜑(1) ⟩ correctly represents the state after the first layer of the deep QNN.
Inductive Step: Propagation from Layer 𝑖1 to 𝑖1 + 1
Assume that after processing layer 𝑖1 , the state |𝜑(𝑖1 ) ⟩ is equivalent to the state after 𝑖1 layers of the deep circuit.
We now show that after processing layer 𝑖1 + 1, the resulting state |𝜑(𝑖1 +1) ⟩ is equivalent to the state after 𝑖1 + 1
layers of the deep circuit. For any 1 ≤ 𝑖1 < 𝑛1 , the algorithm processes the next layer as follows:
    • Entangling and Rotation Operations: First, the algorithm applies:
         1. 𝑅𝑍 (𝜃(𝑖1 ,𝑖2 ,...,𝑖𝐷 ) ) rotations to each qubit.
         2. 𝐶𝑍 gates between qubits at positions (𝑖1 , 𝑖2 , . . . , 𝑖𝐷 ) and (𝑖1 , 𝑖′2 , . . . , 𝑖′𝐷 ) where spatial coordinates differ
            by exactly one position.
      These are the same as the entangling and single-qubit gates at depth 𝑖1 of the deep QNN, applied to |𝜑(𝑖1 ) ⟩.
    • Quantum State Transfer Mechanism: The next step is to transfer the state from layer 𝑖1 to layer 𝑖1 + 1. For
      each position (𝑖2 , . . . , 𝑖𝐷 ) ∈ 𝒮𝐷−1 , we process the qubit at (𝑖1 , 𝑖2 , . . . , 𝑖𝐷 ) based on the value of 𝑥(𝑖1 +1,𝑖2 ,...,𝑖𝐷 ) :
         – Case 1 (𝑥(𝑖1 +1,𝑖2 ,...,𝑖𝐷 ) = 0): We have the following:
              1. The qubit at position (𝑖1 , 𝑖2 , . . . , 𝑖𝐷 ) is a component of |𝜑(𝑖1 ) ⟩,
                                                                              (𝑖 )               (𝑖 )
                                                         |𝜑(𝑖1 ) ⟩ = |0⟩ ⊗ |𝜑̃︀0 1 ⟩ + |1⟩ ⊗ |𝜑̃︀1 1 ⟩ ,                           (S.2.2)
                                                   (𝑖 )        (𝑖 )
                  for some unnormalized states |𝜑̃︀0 1 ⟩ , |𝜑̃︀1 1 ⟩.
                                                                                                                               44

         2. The qubit at position (𝑖1 + 1, 𝑖2 , . . . , 𝑖𝐷 ) is initialized to |+⟩ = √12 (|0⟩ + |1⟩) as specified by the
            condition on the input bit 𝑥(𝑖1 +1,𝑖2 ,...,𝑖𝐷 ) = 0.
         3. The 𝐶𝑍 gate between these qubits creates the entangled state:

                          |0⟩ + |1⟩       (𝑖 )             |0⟩ − |1⟩         (𝑖 )
                    |0⟩ ⊗    √      ⊗ |𝜑̃︀0 1 ⟩ + |1⟩ ⊗ √              ⊗ |𝜑̃︀1 1 ⟩                                        (S.2.3)
                               2                                  2
                      |+⟩ + |−⟩ |0⟩ + |1⟩              (𝑖 )       |+⟩ − |−⟩ |0⟩ − |1⟩          (𝑖 )
                    =      √      ⊗ √            ⊗ |𝜑̃︀0 1 ⟩ +        √        ⊗ √       ⊗ |𝜑̃︀1 1 ⟩                      (S.2.4)
                             2              2                           2          2
                      |+⟩ (︁         (︁
                                           (𝑖 )       (𝑖 )
                                                            )︁           (︁
                                                                              (𝑖 )  (𝑖 )
                                                                                         )︁)︁
                    =       ⊗ |0⟩ ⊗ |𝜑̃︀0 1 ⟩ + |𝜑̃︀1 1 ⟩ + |1⟩ ⊗ |𝜑̃︀0 1 ⟩ − |𝜑̃︀1 1 ⟩                                   (S.2.5)
                       2
                      |−⟩ (︁         (︁
                                           (𝑖 )      (𝑖 )
                                                            )︁           (︁
                                                                             (𝑖 )   (𝑖 )
                                                                                         )︁)︁
                    +      ⊗ |0⟩ ⊗ |𝜑̃︀0 1 ⟩ − |𝜑̃︀1 1 ⟩ + |1⟩ ⊗ |𝜑̃︀0 1 ⟩ + |𝜑̃︀1 1 ⟩                                    (S.2.6)
                       2
                      |+⟩ (︁              (𝑖 )                 (𝑖 )
                                                                    )︁ |−⟩ (︁
                                                                                         (𝑖 )        (𝑖 )
                                                                                                          )︁
                    = √ ⊗ |+⟩ ⊗ |𝜑̃︀0 1 ⟩ + |−⟩ ⊗ |𝜑̃︀1 1 ⟩ + √ ⊗ |+⟩ ⊗ |𝜑̃︀0 1 ⟩ − |−⟩ ⊗ |𝜑̃︀1 1 ⟩ .                     (S.2.7)
                         2                                                  2
         4. Measuring the first qubit in the 𝑋 basis yields a uniformly random outcome 𝑦(𝑖1 ,𝑖2 ,...,𝑖𝐷 ) and collapses
            the state to one of two cases:
              ∗ If 𝑦(𝑖1 ,𝑖2 ,...,𝑖𝐷 ) = 0: the remaining state collapses to
                                                                     (𝑖 )              (𝑖 )
                                                           |+⟩ ⊗ |𝜑̃︀0 1 ⟩ + |−⟩ ⊗ |𝜑̃︀1 1 ⟩ .                            (S.2.8)

              ∗ If 𝑦(𝑖1 ,𝑖2 ,...,𝑖𝐷 ) = 1: the remaining state collapses to
                                                                     (𝑖 )              (𝑖 )
                                                           |+⟩ ⊗ |𝜑̃︀0 1 ⟩ − |−⟩ ⊗ |𝜑̃︀1 1 ⟩ .                            (S.2.9)

            The first qubit measured in the 𝑋 basis is excluded in the above equations.
         5. Applying the 𝐻 gate irrespective of 𝑦(𝑖1 ,𝑖2 ,...,𝑖𝐷 ) turns the state into
                                             (𝑖 )              (𝑖 )
                                   |0⟩ ⊗ |𝜑̃︀0 1 ⟩ + |1⟩ ⊗ |𝜑̃︀1 1 ⟩                      if 𝑦(𝑖1 ,𝑖2 ,...,𝑖𝐷 ) = 0,    (S.2.10)
                                             (𝑖 )              (𝑖 )
                                   |0⟩ ⊗ |𝜑̃︀0 1 ⟩ − |1⟩ ⊗ |𝜑̃︀1 1 ⟩                      if 𝑦(𝑖1 ,𝑖2 ,...,𝑖𝐷 ) = 1.    (S.2.11)

         6. Applying a 𝑍 gate to the (𝑖2 , . . . , 𝑖𝐷 )-th qubit of |𝜑⟩ if 𝑦(𝑖1 ,𝑖2 ,...,𝑖𝐷 ) = 1 maps the state to |0⟩ ⊗
                (𝑖 )             (𝑖 )
            |𝜑̃︀ 1 ⟩ + |1⟩ ⊗ |𝜑̃︀ 1 ⟩ = |𝜑(𝑖1 ) ⟩ in both cases of 𝑦(𝑖 ,𝑖 ,...,𝑖 ) .
              0                1                                         1   2   𝐷

       In Case 1, we have teleported the qubit at position (𝑖1 , 𝑖2 , . . . , 𝑖𝐷 ) to the qubit at position (𝑖1 +
       1, 𝑖2 , . . . , 𝑖𝐷 ) while maintaining the state |𝜑(𝑖1 ) ⟩ unchanged.
     – Case 2 (𝑥(𝑖1 +1,𝑖2 ,...,𝑖𝐷 ) = 1): We have the following:
         1. The qubit at position (𝑖1 + 1, 𝑖2 , . . . , 𝑖𝐷 ) is initialized to |0⟩.
         2. The 𝐶𝑍 gate between the current qubit and |0⟩ has no effect since 𝐶𝑍|𝑏⟩|0⟩ = |𝑏⟩|0⟩ for any 𝑏 ∈ {0, 1}.
         3. Measuring the qubit at position (𝑖1 , 𝑖2 , . . . , 𝑖𝐷 ) in the 𝑋 basis is equivalent to measuring the qubit
            at position (𝑖2 , . . . , 𝑖𝐷 ) in the state |𝜑(𝑖1 ) ⟩ in the 𝑋 basis. This generates a measurement outcome
            𝑦(𝑖1 ,𝑖2 ,...,𝑖𝐷 ) ∈ {0, 1} and collapses the state |𝜑(𝑖1 ) ⟩ according to the measurement outcome.
         4. We reset the qubit at position (𝑖2 , . . . , 𝑖𝐷 ) in the state |𝜑(𝑖1 ) ⟩ to |0⟩.
       In Case 2, the qubit at position (𝑖1 , 𝑖2 , . . . , 𝑖𝐷 ) is not teleported, but the qubit at position (𝑖2 , . . . , 𝑖𝐷 ) in
       the state |𝜑(𝑖1 ) ⟩ is measured and reset to |0⟩.
• State Evolution: After processing all qubits at layer 𝑖1 , the state |𝜑(𝑖1 +1) ⟩ correctly represents the state after
  𝑖1 + 1 layers of the deep QNN. This is because:
    1. Qubits that received teleported states (at positions where 𝑥(𝑖1 +1,𝑖2 ,...,𝑖𝐷 ) = 0) carry forward the quantum
       information from the previous layer.
    2. Qubits initialized to |0⟩ (at positions where 𝑥(𝑖1 +1,𝑖2 ,...,𝑖𝐷 ) = 1) match the mid-circuit measurement and
       qubit reset in the deep QNN.
    3. The pattern of entanglement created by the 𝐶𝑍 gates within each slice matches the entangling operations
       in the corresponding layer of the deep QNN.
                                                                                                                           45

By induction, after all 𝑛1 layers, the final state |𝜑(𝑛1 ) ⟩ is the same as the state after all 𝑛1 layers of the deep QNN.
Final Measurement
At the final slice (𝑖1 = 𝑛1 ), all qubits are measured in the 𝑋 basis. The measurement outcomes 𝑦(𝑛1 ,𝑖2 ,...,𝑖𝐷 )
represent the final measurement results of the deep circuit. The complete output vector 𝑦 consists of both the
intermediate measurement outcomes 𝑦(𝑖1 ,𝑖2 ,...,𝑖𝐷 ) for 1 ≤ 𝑖1 < 𝑛1 , and the final measurement outcomes 𝑦(𝑛1 ,𝑖2 ,...,𝑖𝐷 ) .
Equivalence of the Output Distribution over 𝑦
The distribution over output vectors 𝑦 generated by this process is equivalent to the output distribution of the depth-
𝑛1 circuit because the quantum state evolution through layers 𝑖1 = 1, 2, . . . , 𝑛1 precisely simulates the evolution
of the deep circuit through its 𝑛1 layers, and the final measurement in the 𝑋 basis matches the measurement of
the deep circuit at the last level. Therefore, despite having constant depth in terms of quantum circuit layout,
the shallow QNN generates samples from the same distribution as the randomly sampled depth-𝑛1 QNN on an
(𝐷 − 1)-dimensional lattice of size 𝑛2 × · · · × 𝑛𝐷 .
  We now show that for any polynomial-size quantum circuit 𝐶, there exists a family of deep quantum circuits
containing 𝐶 such that an instantaneously-deep QNN generates output bitstrings that correspond to sampling a
deep QNN in this family and generating an output bitstring from the deep QNN. To establish this result, we first
compile the circuit 𝐶 into a 1D circuit 𝐷 consisting only of 𝐻, 𝑅𝑍 (𝜃), 𝐶𝑍 gates in a layered pattern.
Fact 1 (Universality of 𝐻, 𝑅𝑍 (𝜃), 𝐶𝑍 (84 )). For any 𝜖 > 0 and any 𝑚-qubit circuit 𝐶 with ℓ two-qubit gates, we
can create an 𝑚-qubit 1D circuit 𝐷 with 𝑟 = poly(𝑚, ℓ, log(1/𝜖)) rounds of the following circuit layers:
   1. a layer of Hadamard gates on all 𝑚 qubits;
   2. a layer of 𝑅𝑍 (𝜃) gates on all qubits with independent 𝜃 on each of the 𝑚 qubits;
   3. a layer of 𝐶𝑍 gates on some choices of nearest neighbors on the 1D line,
such that the unitaries implemented by 𝐶 and 𝐷 differ by at most 𝜖 error in diamond distance.
   We now define the family of deep quantum circuits, which corresponds to injecting different patterns of single-
qubit 𝑍 gates in each round of the circuit layers.
Definition 17 (A family of deep quantum circuits). For any 𝜖 > 0 and any 𝑚-qubit circuit 𝐶 with ℓ two-qubit
gates, consider the 𝑚-qubit 1D circuit 𝐷 with 𝑟 = poly(𝑚, ℓ, log(1/𝜖)) rounds given in Fact 1. We define a family
of deep quantum circuits {𝐷(𝑦 ′ )}𝑦′ ∈{0,1}(𝑟−1)×𝑚 , where each circuit 𝐷(𝑦) is the same as 𝐷 but applies a 𝑍 gate on
the 𝑖-th qubit at the end of the 𝑗-th round if 𝑦(𝑗−1)×𝑚+𝑖 = 1 for all 𝑖 ∈ {1, . . . , 𝑚} and 𝑗 ∈ {1, . . . , 𝑟 − 1}. This
family contains a circuit 𝐷(0(𝑟−1)×𝑚 ) such that 𝐷(0(𝑟−1)×𝑚 ) = 𝐷 is 𝜖-close to 𝐶. From the log(1/𝜖) scaling, we
can choose 𝜖 to be exponentially small, so 𝐷 is exponentially close to 𝐶.
   The following corollary follows from Lemma 2 and Fact 1 and shows that the instantaneously-deep QNN samples
a deep quantum circuits in the family {𝐷(𝑦 ′ )} and simulates the deep quantum circuit.
Corollary 2 (Instantaneously-deep QNN for any deep quantum circuit). For any 𝜖 > 0 and any 𝑚-qubit circuit
𝐶 with ℓ two-qubit gates, consider the family of 𝑚-qubit 1D deep circuits {𝐷(𝑦 ′ )} with 𝑟 = poly(𝑚, ℓ, log(1/𝜖))
given in Definition 17. There exists an instantaneously-deep QNN over 𝑛 = 𝑚 × 𝑟 qubits with a geometry 𝐺 equal
to the 2D 𝑚 × 𝑟 square lattice with some edges removed, such that when the input is the all-zero bitstring 𝑥 = 0𝑛 ,
the output distribution over 𝑦 ∈ {0, 1}𝑛 corresponds to sampling 𝑦 ′ ∈ {0, 1}(𝑟−1)×𝑚 uniformly and setting the first
(𝑟 − 1) × 𝑚 bits of 𝑦 to be equal to 𝑦 ′ and the last 𝑚 bits of 𝑦 to be equal to the output 𝑚-bit string from measuring
the output state of the deep quantum circuit 𝐷(𝑦 ′ ) in the standard basis.


                     H.3.    Quantum advantage for learning to generate classical bitstrings

  We begin by stating a conjecture regarding sampling deep quantum circuits and generating bitstrings from them.
Conjecture 1 (Classical hardness of sampling deep quantum circuits). There exists a family of polynomial-size
quantum circuits {𝐶𝑛 }𝑛≥1 with {𝐷𝑛 (𝑦 ′ )}𝑦′ constructed from 𝐶𝑛 as in Definition 17, such that no families of
polynomial-size classical circuits can take 𝑛 ≥ 1 and many random bits as input and output a uniformly random
bitstring 𝑦 ′ and an output bitstring resulting from measuring the output state 𝐷𝑛 (𝑦 ′ ) |0𝑛 ⟩ in the standard basis.
  Using standard techniques in complexity theory (50 , 56 –58 ), Conjecture 1 can be established by relying on more
fundamental results and conjectures in complexity theory, namely that the non-uniform polynomial hierarchy does
not collapse. This is formally given by the following proposition.
                                                                                                                   46

Proposition 4. Assuming the non-uniform polynomial hierarchy does not collapse, Conjecture 1 is true.
Proof. We prove the proposition by contradiction. Assume that Conjecture 1 is false. This means that for any family
                                                                                                             (cl)
of polynomial-size quantum circuits {𝐶𝑛 }𝑛≥1 , there exists a family of polynomial-size classical circuits {𝐶𝑛 }𝑛≥1
that can sample from the output distribution described in Conjecture 1. We now show that this implies the collapse
of the non-uniform polynomial hierarchy.
   Consider the complexity class PostBQP, which contains all languages that can be recognized by a uniform family
of polynomial-size quantum circuits {𝐶𝑛 }𝑛 with the ability to postselect on the last qubit being zero. Also,
consider the complexity class PostBPP/poly, which contains all languages that can be recognized by a probabilistic
polynomial-time Turing machine that takes in a polynomial-size advice string and has the ability to postselect on
bits. For any language 𝐿 in PostBQP, we consider the uniform family of polynomial-size quantum circuits {𝐶𝑛 }𝑛
                                                                                                                (cl)
for recognizing 𝐿, and the associated (possibly non-uniform) family of polynomial-size classical circuits {𝐶𝑛 }𝑛
that can sample a uniform random bitstring 𝑦 and a bitstring from measuring 𝐷𝑛 (𝑦 ) |0 ⟩ in the standard basis.
                                                ′                                       ′   𝑛

We now construct a probabilistic polynomial-time Turing machine 𝑀 that takes in a polynomial-size advice string
and has the ability to postselect on bits to recognize 𝐿 ∈ PostBQP. For each input size 𝑛, we set the advice string
                           (cl)
to be a specification of 𝐶𝑛 . Recall from Definition 17 that when 𝑦 ′ is all zero, we have 𝐷𝑛 (𝑦 ′ ) is exponentially
                              (cl)
close to 𝐶𝑛 . By running 𝐶𝑛 as specified by the advice string on the Turing machine 𝑀 and postselecting on
obtaining 𝑦 being all zero and the last bit of the output from measuring 𝐷𝑛 (𝑦 ′ ) |0𝑛 ⟩ being zero, 𝑀 can simulate
            ′

postselection on 𝐶𝑛 to recognize 𝐿 ∈ PostBQP. Hence, this implies that PostBQP ⊆ PostBPP/poly.
   We now restate three well-known results from complexity theory. First, from (85 ) showing the power of post-
selection in quantum computing, we have PostBQP = PP. Second, from Toda’s theorem (86 ) showing the power
of PP, we have PH = PPP . Finally, following (87 ) with advice strings being passed through in the proof, we have
PPostBPP/poly ⊆ Σ3 /poly. Together, by combining PostBQP ⊆ PostBPP/poly, we have

                                  PH = PPP = PPostBQP ⊆ PPostBPP/poly ⊆ Σ3 /poly.                            (S.3.12)
Because the third level of non-uniform polynomial hierarchy is contained in the non-uniform polynomial hierarchy,
Σ3 /poly ⊆ PH/poly, we have PH/poly = Σ3 /poly, which contradicts the assumption.
  The result above focuses on exact sampling. To extend the classical hardness to approximate sampling up to some
small additive error in total variation distance, one can rely on the classical hardness of some counting problems;
see (50 , 56 –58 ). From Conjecture 1 and the results established regarding the efficient learning of shallow QNNs
and the properties of instantaneously-deep QNN, we can establish the following theorems.
Theorem 12 (Generative advantage with tomographically-complete shallow QNNs). Learning generative shallow
QNNs that are tomographically-complete is quantumly easy but classically hard under Conjecture 1.
Theorem 13 (Generative advantage with instantaneously-deep QNNs). Learning generative instantaneously-deep
QNNs is quantumly easy but classically hard under Conjecture 1.


                                       H.4.    Proof of Theorem 12 and 13

  We first establish quantum easiness for both theorems, then proceed to prove classical hardness.


                                  H.4.a.   Proof of quantum easiness for Theorem 12

   The quantum easiness follows from the learning algorithm presented in Appendix F. For simplicity, we consider
the set of single-qubit states in Definition 15 to be {|0⟩ , |1⟩ , |+⟩ , |−⟩ , |𝑦+⟩ , |𝑦−⟩} and the set of two-outcome
measurements in Definition 15 to be 𝑋, 𝑌 , or 𝑍 basis measurements. Other tomographically-complete single-qubit
input states and two-outcome measurements apply similarly after adapting the unbiased classical shadow estimator
of Equation (S.4.18) in Lemma 1.
   A classical dataset consisting of random samples (𝑥𝑖 , 𝑦𝑖 ) for uniformly random input bitstring 𝑥𝑖 and the cor-
responding output bitstring 𝑦𝑖 sampled according to an unknown generative shallow QNN is equivalent to the
classical dataset considered in Appendix F.1. As a result, Theorem 8 shows that a quantum computer can learn
any unknown shallow quantum circuits up to a small diamond distance in polynomial time. More precisely, our
theorem gives a classical algorithm that can efficiently learn a classical description of the shallow quantum circuit,
but the classical algorithm cannot efficiently generate from the learned quantum circuit. This immediately implies
a quantum algorithm can efficiently learn. After learning the shallow quantum circuits, a quantum computer can
generate 𝑦 from the distribution 𝑝QNN (𝑦|𝑥; 𝜃)⃗ associated with the generative QNN efficiently and accurately with
small total variation distance for any input 𝑥.
                                                                                                                                47

                                      H.4.b.   Proof of quantum easiness for Theorem 13

  The quantum easiness can be shown directly using the structure of the instantaneously-deep QNN. Suppose we are
given a dataset consisting of uniformly random input bitstrings 𝑥 ∈ {0, 1}𝑛 and the corresponding output bitstrings
𝑦 ∈ {0, 1}𝑛 sampled according to an unknown generative instantaneously-deep QNN. From Lemma 2, for each
qubit labeled by a 𝐷-dimensional coordinate (𝑖1 , . . . , 𝑖𝐷 ) with 1 ≤ 𝑖𝑗 ≤ 𝑛𝑗 , ∀1 ≤ 𝑗 ≤ 𝐷, we can consider the input
bitstring when 𝑥𝑖1 ,...,𝑖𝐷 = 0 but 𝑥𝑖′1 ,...,𝑖′𝐷 = 1 for all neighboring qubits (𝑖′1 , . . . , 𝑖′𝐷 ) with 1 ≤ 𝑖′𝑗 ≤ 𝑛𝑗 , ∀1 ≤ 𝑗 ≤ 𝐷
      ∑︀𝐷                                                                                                                     (𝑡)
with 𝑗=1 |𝑖𝑗 − 𝑖′𝑗 | = 1. Let 𝑁sp be the number of input bitstrings 𝑥 that satisfy this condition, and 𝑦𝑖 for
𝑡 = 1, . . . , 𝑁sp be the measurement outcome on the 𝑖-th qubit for those input bitstrings.
  From the 𝑛1 -depth quantum circuit simulation on the (𝐷 − 1)-dimensional lattice, we can see that the measure-
ment outcome 𝑦𝑖 for the input bitstrings satisfying the above condition is distributed according to the following
experiment:
   1. Prepare a single-qubit |+⟩ state,
   2. Apply an 𝑅𝑍 (𝜃𝑖 ) rotation with an unknown 𝜃𝑖 ,
   3. Measure the single-qubit state in the 𝑋 basis to obtain 𝑦𝑖 .
In this single-qubit experiment, we have:

                                                                 1 − cos(2𝜃𝑖 )
                                                  Pr[𝑦𝑖 = 1] =                 .                                          (S.4.13)
                                                                      2
Hence, we can learn 𝜃𝑖 up to a small error using the estimator:
                                                     ⎛                   ⎞
                                                                𝑁sp
                                            1                1  ∑︁   (𝑡)
                                       𝜃^𝑖 = arccos ⎝1 − 2          𝑦 ⎠.                                                  (S.4.14)
                                            2               𝑁sp 𝑡=1 𝑖

Because the specified condition that all adjacent 𝑥𝑖′ are 1 while the target 𝑥𝑖 is 0 is satisfied with a constant probabil-
ity for 𝐷 = 𝒪(1) over random input bitstrings 𝑥, we have 𝑁sp = 𝒪(𝑁 ) with high probability, where 𝑁 is the size of
the training dataset (i.e., the total number of input bitstrings). This immediately implies that any instantaneously-
deep QNN can be efficiently learned to a small diamond distance. After learning the instantaneously-deep QNN,
a quantum computer can generate 𝑦 from the distribution 𝑝QNN (𝑦|𝑥; 𝜃)    ⃗ associated with the generative QNN accu-
rately with small total variation distance for any input bitstring 𝑥 ∈ {0, 1}𝑛 .


                                      H.4.c.   Proof of classical hardness for Theorem 13.

   We first establish the classical hardness for learning generative instantaneously-deep QNNs (Theorem 13).
Then, we use a result established in this proof to demonstrate the classical hardness for learning generative
tomographically-complete shallow QNNs (Theorem 12).
   We prove classical hardness for learning generative instantaneously-deep QNNs in Definition 16 by contradic-
tion. Suppose that it is classically easy to learn generative models created by any family of polynomial-size
instantaneously-deep QNNs. Consider the family of polynomial-size quantum circuits {𝐶𝑛 }𝑛≥1 from Conjecture 1
with {𝐷𝑛 (𝑦 ′ )}𝑦′ constructed from 𝐶𝑛 as in Definition 17. From Corollary 2, there exists a family of polynomial-size
instantaneously-deep QNNs such that generating an output bitstring 𝑦 from the QNNs with the all-zero input bit-
string 𝑥 is equivalent to sampling a uniformly random bitstring 𝑦 ′ and an output bitstring resulting from measuring
the output state 𝐷𝑛 (𝑦 ′ ) |0𝑛 ⟩ in the standard basis. The classical easiness to learn generative models created by any
family of polynomial-size instantaneously-deep QNNs, including the one associated with 𝐷𝑛 (𝑦 ′ ) |0𝑛 ⟩, implies that
for any 𝑛 ≥ 1, there exists a poly(𝑛)-time classical algorithm such that given a classical dataset consisting of poly(𝑛)
pairs of (𝑥𝑖 , 𝑦𝑖 ) where 𝑦𝑖 is sampled according to the generative model 𝑝(𝑦|𝑥𝑖 ) created by the instantaneously-deep
QNN, the classical algorithm can sample from 𝑝(𝑦|𝑥) for any 𝑥 in poly(𝑛) time.
   From this, we can combine both the polynomial-size classical dataset and the polynomial-time classical sampling
algorithm into a family of polynomial-size classical circuit (or a polynomial-time classical algorithm with polynomial-
size advice string). This family of polynomial-size classical circuits can take 𝑛 ≥ 1, the all-zero input bitstring 𝑥,
and many random bits as input and output a uniformly random bitstring 𝑦 ′ and an output bitstring resulting from
measuring the output state 𝐷𝑛 (𝑦 ′ ) |0𝑛 ⟩ in the standard basis. This contradict with Conjecture 1 that no families
of polynomial-size classical circuits can take 𝑛 ≥ 1 and many random bits as input and output a uniformly random
bitstring 𝑦 ′ and an output bitstring resulting from measuring the output state 𝐷𝑛 (𝑦 ′ ) |0𝑛 ⟩ in the standard basis.
                                                                                                                   48

   Together, we have shown that under Conjecture 1, there do not exist polynomial-size classical circuits for sampling
from the generative model 𝑝(𝑦|𝑥) created by polynomial-size instantaneously-deep QNNs with the all-zero input
bitstring. Furthermore, this implies that it is classically hard to learn generative models defined by polynomial-size
instantaneously-deep QNNs.


                                   H.4.d.   Proof of classical hardness for Theorem 12

  The classical hardness in Theorem 12 is proven by first proving the classical hardness of a variant of
instantaneously-deep QNNs that is tomographically-complete. We begin by defining tomographically-complete
instantaneously-deep QNNs:
Definition 18 (Tomographically-complete instantaneously-deep QNNs). Given any number of qubits 𝑛 and a
connectivity graph 𝐺 over 𝑛 qubits, a tomographically-complete instantaneously-deep QNN is an 𝑛-qubit circuit
with geometry defined by 𝐺. The QNN has 𝑛 real parameters 𝜃⃗ ∈ R𝑛 , takes an input bitstring 𝑥 ∈ {0, 1}5𝑛 , and
generates an output bitstring 𝑦 ∈ {0, 1}𝑛 . Consider 𝑥 to be 𝑛 blocks of 5 bits. The 𝑖-th block of the bitstring 𝑥
determines:
   • The input state for the 𝑖-th qubit chosen from {|0⟩ , |1⟩ , |+⟩ , |−⟩ , |𝑦+⟩ , |𝑦−⟩}
   • The measurement basis for the 𝑖-th qubit chosen from {𝑋, 𝑌, 𝑍}
The distribution 𝑝(𝑦|𝑥) associated with the tomographically-complete instantaneously-deep QNN can be sampled
as follows:
   1. Prepare the 𝑛-qubit product input state according to bitstring 𝑥.
   2. Apply a single layer of 𝑅𝑍 (𝜃𝑖 ) rotation gates to all 𝑛 qubits, where {𝜃𝑖 }𝑛𝑖=1 are the 𝑛 trainable parameters,
      and 𝑅𝑍 (𝜃𝑖 ) = 𝑒−𝑖𝜃𝑖 𝑍/2 .
   3. Apply a layer of 𝐶𝑍 gates on all edges in the connectivity graph 𝐺.
   4. Measure the 𝑛-qubit final state in the Pauli basis according to bitstring 𝑥.
This quantum circuit is shallow with 𝒪(1) circuit depth regardless of the number of qubits.
   Suppose that it is classically easy to learn generative models created by any polynomial-size tomographically-
complete shallow QNNs. Because a polynomial-size tomographically-complete instantaneously-deep QNN is a
polynomial-size tomographically-complete shallow QNN, it is classically easy to learn generative models created
by any polynomial-size tomographically-complete instantaneously-deep QNNs. This implies that there exists a
polynomial-time classical algorithm such that given a polynomial-size dataset consisting of pairs (𝑥𝑖 , 𝑦𝑖 ) where
𝑦𝑖 is sampled according to the generative model 𝑝(𝑦|𝑥𝑖 ) created by a polynomial-size tomographically-complete
instantaneously-deep QNN, the classical algorithm can sample from 𝑝(𝑦|𝑥) for any input bitstring 𝑥 in polynomial
time. From this, we can combine both the polynomial-size classical dataset and the polynomial-time classical
sampling algorithm into a polynomial-size classical circuit to obtain that there exists a polynomial-size classical
circuit 𝐶 such that given any input bitstring 𝑥 and many random bits, the classical circuit 𝐶 can sample the output
bitstring 𝑦 according to the generative model 𝑝(𝑦|𝑥).
   Now, if we consider the input bitstring 𝑥 to specify the preparation of the state |+𝑛 ⟩ and the measurement
in the Pauli-𝑋 basis for all qubits, then sampling output bitstring 𝑦 from the generative model 𝑝(𝑦|𝑥) defined
by the tomographically-complete instantaneously-deep QNN is the same as sampling from the corresponding
instantaneously-deep QNN with the all-zero input bitstring in Definition 16. Hence, there exist polynomial-size
classical circuits for sampling from the generative model created by polynomial-size instantaneously-deep QNNs
with the all-zero input bitstring. As we have seen earlier, under Conjecture 1, there do not exist polynomial-size
classical circuits for sampling from the generative model 𝑝(𝑦|𝑥) created by polynomial-size instantaneously-deep
QNNs with the all-zero input bitstring. As a result, under Conjecture 1, it is classically hard to learn generative
models defined by polynomial-size tomographically-complete shallow QNNs.


                        I.   Generative quantum advantage for speeding up simulation

Definition 19 (The task of speeding up physical simulation). The input to the problem is a circuit 𝐶 that
implements an 𝑛-qubit target unitary 𝑈 for simulating a physical system using poly(𝑛) two-qubit gates, poly(𝑛)
ancilla qubits, and poly(𝑛) depth. We are given the promise that there exists a more efficient approach for
implementing the unitary 𝑈 using an 𝑛-qubit circuit of 𝒪(1) depth. The goal is to generate an output circuit 𝐶 ′
                                                                                                                      49

over 𝑛 qubits with only 𝒪(1) circuit depth that implements a quantum channel inverse-polynomially close to the
target unitary 𝑈 .
Theorem 14 (Generative quantum advantage for speeding up physical simulation). Under the standard assump-
tion that BPP ̸= BQP, the problem of generating a more efficient circuit 𝐶 ′ to speed up an input circuit 𝐶 is
efficiently solvable on a quantum computer but classically intractable. Hence, there exists a generative quantum
advantage for the task of speeding up physical simulation.
Proof. We establish this theorem by proving the quantum easiness and the classical hardness for the task of speeding
up physical simulation.

Quantum easiness: We first establish quantum easiness as follows. We begin by implementing the polynomial-
size input circuit 𝐶 on a quantum computer. Let 𝑈 be the target unitary associated with circuit 𝐶. We collect
the training set defined in Section F.1 by executing circuit 𝐶 a polynomial number of times. In each run, we
input different random product states and measure each qubit of the output state in a random Pauli basis. By
the problem’s promise, there exists an unknown 𝑛-qubit circuit 𝐶 * of depth 𝒪(1) that also implements the target
unitary 𝑈 . Using the algorithm presented in Section F, we can leverage the collected dataset to learn an 𝒪(1)-depth
circuit 𝐶 ′ such that the quantum channel implemented by 𝐶 ′ is inverse-polynomially close to the target unitary
𝑈 . Since all quantum operations are performed efficiently, we have successfully generated an output circuit 𝐶 ′ that
solves the task of speeding up physical simulation.

Classical hardness: For classical hardness, we proceed by contradiction. Assume there exists a polynomial-
time classical algorithm that solves this task. We will prove that this assumption implies the existence of a
polynomial-time classical algorithm that can decide whether the probability of measuring 1 on the first qubit of
any polynomial-size quantum circuit is above 2/3 or below 1/3, given the promise that one of these two cases holds.
This would contradict the assumption that BPP ̸= BQP.
  Given any polynomial-size quantum circuit 𝐷 over 𝑛 qubits, consider another quantum circuit 𝐶 over 𝑛(𝑛 + 1)
qubits defined as:
            2                                                                      )︀ (︁ 2       )︁
         ⟨0𝑛 | · 𝐷†,⊗𝑛 ⊗ Id · MAJ1, 𝑛 + 1, . . . , 𝑛(𝑛 − 1) + 1 → 𝑛2 + 1 · 𝐷⊗𝑛 ⊗ Id · |0𝑛 ⟩ ⊗ |𝜓⟩ ,         (S.0.1)
                (︀         )︀                                             (︀


where |𝜓⟩ is an 𝑛-qubit input state, MAJ1, 𝑛 + 1, . . . , 𝑛(𝑛 − 1) + 1 → 𝑛2 + 1 is a quantum circuit that computes
the majority bit of the 𝑛 qubits indexed by 1, 𝑛 + 1, . . . , 𝑛(𝑛 − 1) + 1 and applies an 𝑋 gate to the (𝑛2 + 1)-th
                2
qubit, and ⟨0𝑛 | represents postselection on the event that the first 𝑛2 qubits are all in state |0⟩. This construction
implements a linear map over 𝑛 qubits. Due to the uncomputation step 𝐷†,⊗𝑛 , this linear map approximates a
unitary operation with exponentially small error (as the postselection succeeds with only an exponentially small
failure probability). Therefore, circuit 𝐶 implements an 𝑛-qubit unitary 𝑈 up to an exponentially small error.
Moreover, the 𝑛-qubit unitary 𝑈 has a specific structure: it acts only on the first qubit and is equivalent to an 𝑋
gate if the probability of measuring 1 on the first qubit in circuit 𝐷 exceeds 2/3, and equivalent to the identity
gate if this probability is below 1/3. This specific structure follows from the MAJ1,𝑛+1,...,𝑛(𝑛−1)+1→𝑛2 +1 operation.
   If a polynomial-time classical algorithm could solve this task by generating a constant-depth quantum circuit
𝐶 ′ that approximately implements the 𝑛-qubit unitary 𝑈 , we could use 𝐶 ′ to determine whether 𝑈 is closer to
an 𝑋 or an 𝐼 gate on the first qubit. We would simply take the Pauli operator 𝑍1 acting on the first qubit and
classically compute the Heisenberg-evolved observable 𝐶 ′† 𝑍1 𝐶 ′ . This calculation is classically efficient because 𝐶 ′
has constant depth. By determining whether 𝐶 ′† 𝑍1 𝐶 ′ is closer to −𝑍1 or 𝑍1 , we can decide whether 𝑈 more
closely resembles an 𝑋 or an 𝐼 gate on the first qubit. This decision reveals whether the probability of measuring
1 on the first qubit of the original quantum circuit 𝐷 is above 2/3 or below 1/3, which would imply BPP = BQP,
contradicting our assumption.
